<html><head><title>Виктор Суворов. Советская военная разведка: взгляд изнутри (engl)</title></head><body><pre><div align=right><div align=right><form action=mailto:hit@library.niisi.ras.ru method=POST><a href=/HITPARAD/><font color=black>Оцените</font></a> этот текст:<tt><font size=-1><INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=file VALUE=/WSUWOROW/intelligence_engl.txt><SELECT NAME=ocenka><OPTION VALUE=0>Не читал<OPTION VALUE=10>10<OPTION VALUE=9>9<OPTION VALUE=8>8<OPTION VALUE=7>7<OPTION VALUE=6>6<OPTION VALUE=5>5<OPTION VALUE=4>4<OPTION VALUE=3>3<OPTION VALUE=2>2<OPTION VALUE=1>1</SELECT><INPUT TYPE=submit VALUE=Send></font></tt></form></div><form action=/WSUWOROW/intelligence_engl.txt><select name=format><OPTION VALUE="_Contents">Содержание<OPTION VALUE="_with-big-pictures.html">Fine HTML<OPTION VALUE="_Ascii.txt">txt(Word,КПК)<OPTION VALUE=".gz">gZip<OPTION VALUE="">Lib.ru html</select><input type=submit value=go></form></div><pre>
<ul><a name=0></a><h2>Виктор Суворов. Советская военная разведка: взгляд изнутри (engl)</h2></ul>

---------------------------------------------------------------
     Copyright (c) 1984 by Viktor Suvorov
     ISBN 0-02-615510-9
     OCR: MadMax, May 2002
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

<ul><a name=1></a><h2>Viktor Suvorov. Inside soviet military intelligence</h2></ul>

     To the memory of Oleg Vladimirovich Penkovsky

     Contents
     Introduction
     <b>PART ONE</b>
     1 The Triumvirate
     2 History
     3 The Pyramid
     4 The GRU and the Military Industrial Commission (VPK)
     5 But Why is Nothing Known about it?
     6 The GRU and the 'Younger Brothers'
     7 The GRU and the KGB
     8 The Centre
     9 The Procurement Organs
     10 Fleet Intelligence
     11 The GRU Processing Organs
     12 Support Services
     <b>PART TWO</b>
     1 Illegals
     2 The Undercover Residency
     3 Agents
     4 Agent Recruiting
     5 Agent Communications
     6 The Practice of Agent Work
     7 Operational Intelligence
     8 Tactical Reconnaissance
     9 The Training and Privileges of Personnel
     Conclusion
     For GRU Officers Only
     Appendix A: Leaders of Soviet Military Intelligence
     Appendix B: The GRU High Command and Leading GRU Officers
     Appendix C: Some Case Histories of GRU Activities
     Index
     Introduction
     There is but one opinion as to which country in the world possesses the
most powerful secret intelligence service. Without the  slightest doubt that
country  is  the  Soviet  Union,  and  the  name  of  the  monstrous  secret
organisation without  precedent in the history of mankind is the KGB. But on
the question as  to which country possesses  the second most powerful secret
organisation, the opinions of specialists  differ. Strange as it  may  seem,
the country to which this organisation belongs is also the Soviet Union, and
the organisation itself is called the Chief  Intelligence Directorate of the
General Staff.
     This book was written in order to confirm this simple fact.
     At  first  it was  conceived  as an  instructional manual for a  narrow
circle of specialists. Subsequently it was revised by the author for a wider
public.  The  revision  was confined  mainly  to  the  excision  of  certain
definitions and  technical  details which would be of  little interest. Even
after this, there remained in  the book many details  of a technical nature,
which may sometimes make for difficult reading.  But though I may apologise,
there  is nothing to be  done. In  order to understand  a  disease (and  the
desire to understand a disease implies a  desire  to  fight against it), one
must know its pathology as well as its symptoms.
<ul><a name=2></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     For one  of their  very  first  chosen myths, the communists decided to
record that  the organs of  enforcement  of the new State  were  not created
until  the nineteenth  of December  1917.  This falsehood  was circulated in
order  to  prove that Soviet power,  in  the first  forty-one  days  of  its
existence, could  dispense  with the mass executions so  familiar  to  other
revolutions. The  falsehood is  easily  exposed. It is sufficient to look at
the editions of the  Bolshevist papers for those days which shook the world.
The Organs and subsequent mass  executions existed from the first  hour, the
first minute,  the first infantile  wail  of  this Soviet  power. That first
night,  having announced  to  the  world  the birth of the most bloodthirsty
dictatorship in its  history, Lenin appointed  its leaders.  Among  them was
comrade  A. I. Rikov, the head  of the  People's  Commissariat for  Internal
Affairs which sounds less innocuous in its abbreviation, NKVD. Comrade Rikov
was later shot, but  not before he  had managed to write into the history of
the Organs certain bloody pages which the Soviet  leadership would prefer to
forget  about. Fifteen men have been appointed to  the post  of Head  of the
Organs, of which  three were  hounded out  of  the  Soviet  government  with
ignominy. One died at his post. One was secretly destroyed by members of the
Soviet government (as was later publicly admitted). Seven comrades were shot
or  hanged,  and  tortured  with  great  refinement  before  their  official
punishment. We are  not going  to guess  about  the  futures of three  still
living  who have occupied the post. The  fate of the  deputy  heads has been
equally violent, even after the death of comrade Stalin.
     The paradox of this endless bloody orgy would seem to be this. Why does
the  most powerful  criminal organisation in the world so easily and  freely
give up its leaders  to be torn to pieces? How is the Politburo able to deal
with  them so  unceremoniously,  clearly not experiencing the slightest fear
before these seemingly  all-powerful  personalities  and  the  organisations
headed by them? How is it that the Politburo has practically no difficulties
in  displacing not only individual heads of State Security but in destroying
whole flocks of the most influential State Security officers? Where lies the
secret of this limitless power of the Politburo?
     The answer  is  very simple. The method is an old one and has been used
successfully for thousands of years. It boils down to the principle: 'divide
and rule'. In the beginning, in order to rule, Lenin  divided everything  in
Russia that was capable of being divided, and ever since the communists have
continued  faithfully to carry out the instructions of the great founder  of
the first proletarian state.
     Each  system  of  governing the State is  duplicated  and reduplicated.
Soviet power itself is duplicated. If one visits  any regional  committee of
the Party  and then the Regional  Executive Committee one  is struck  by the
fact that two separate organizations having almost identical  structures and
deciding  identical  prob1ems  nevertheless  take  completely  contradictory
decisions. Neither one of  these organisations has  the  authority to decide
anything independently.
     This  same  system  exists at  all stages  and  at all  levels  of  the
Government.  If we  look at the really  important decisions  of  the  Soviet
leadership, those which are  published in the papers, we will  find that any
one of them is taken only at joint sessions of the Central Committee  of the
Party  and the  Council of Ministers. I have in  front of me as  I write the
last  joint  resolution on  raising the quality and  widening the  range  of
production  of  children's  toys. Neither the  Council  of  Ministers of the
gigantic State  structure nor the Central Committee of  the  ruling Party is
able, since neither  has  the  power and authority,  to take  an independent
decision on such an important matter. But we are not talking here just about
Ministers and  First Secretaries. At all lower levels the same procedure  is
to be observed. For example, only a joint decision of the  Central Committee
of the  Communist  Party of a  republic and  the Council of Ministers of the
same  republic, or the  Provincial  Committee and  the Provincial  Executive
Committee, is valid. At these levels of course, such crucial problems as the
quality of children's toys  are not decided; but  the principle remains that
no  separate  and independent  decisions  can  be taken. In shape and  form,
Soviet  power  is  everywhere  duplicated,  from  the  planning  of   rocket
launchings into space to the organisation for the burial of Soviet citizens,
from  the management of diplomatic missions abroad to lunatic asylums,  from
the construction of sewers to atomic ice-breakers.
     In addition to the governing organs which give orders and see that they
are  carried  out,  there  also  exist  Central  Control  Organs  which  are
independent of  the local authority. The basic one of these is of course the
KGB, but independently of the KGB other powerful organs are also active: the
innocent-sounding People's Control for example, a secret police organisation
subordinated to a Politburo member who exercises almost as much influence as
the Chief  of the KGB. In addition to the  People's Control, the Ministry of
the Interior is also active and this is subordinated neither  to the KGB nor
to Control. There is also the Central Organ of the press, a visit  of  which
to a factory or workshop causes hardly less anger than a visit of the OBHSS,
the socialist  fraud  squad.  On  the initiative  of  Lenin, it was  seen as
essential  that  each  powerful organ or  organisation which is  capable  of
taking independent decisions be counter-balanced by the existence of another
no  less powerful bureaucratic organisation.  The thinking goes:  we  have a
newspaper Pravda,  let's have another on  a similar scale -  Izvestia.  Tass
created, as a counter-balance to it, APN. Not for competition but simply for
duplication. In this way the  comrades in the Politburo are able  to live  a
quieter life.  To control everybody and everything is absolutely impossible,
and this  is  why duplication exists.  Everybody jealously pursues his rival
and  in good  time  informs whoever  he  should  inform of  any  flashes  of
inspiration, of any deviation from the established norm,  any effort to look
at  what  is  going  on  from  the standpoint  of  a  healthy critical mind.
Duplication in  everything  is  the prime  principle and  reason  behind the
terrifying stagnation of all walks of life in Soviet society. It is also the
reason for the  unprecedented stability of  the regime.  In duplicating  the
Organs, the Politburo was  able to neutralise  any attempt by them  to raise
the standard of revolt against their creators, and thus it has always been.
     The  creation of  a  system  of  parallel institutions began  with  the
creation   of   the  Tcheka,   an  organisation  called  into  existence  to
counter-balance the already  growing powers of the People's Commissariat for
Internal Affairs. During the course  of the whole of the civil war these two
bloody  organisations existed independently, and  as rivals, of  each other.
Their  influence grew  to  immense  proportions,  and  Lenin  suggested  the
creation  of yet another independent organ to  carry out the task of control
and  retribution,  the  Rabkrin.  This  organ,  known today as the  People's
Control, is still waiting  for somebody  to research into its  history.  The
Rabkrin was Lenin's love-child,  remembered by him even on his deathbed. The
Rabkrin or,  more formally,  the Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate was not
created as  an organ  of repression for the  whole  population,  but  as  an
organisation  for the control of the ruling Bolshevik elite and, above  all,
the Tcheka and the People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs.
     In the meantime  the  tentacles of the Tcheka had spread out  over  the
frontiers and  the  Bolkshevik leaders  were forced  to  create yet  another
parallel  organisation  to  the  Tcheka,  capable  of  counterbalancing  its
external  activities.  Neither the People's Commissariat nor the Rabkrin was
able to fulfill this  role. On the personal order of the indefatigable Lenin
on 21 October 1918, an external intelligence service, completely independent
of the Tcheka, was created under  the  meaningless title  of  the Registered
Directorate of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army. At  the  present time it
is called  the  Chief Intelligence Directorate of  the General Staff of  the
Soviet Army, and also known by its military  classification as 'unit 44388'.
In  history  there is a  number of examples  of similar organisations within
repressive regimes. The most obvious of these is of course Hitler's Germany.
The SS  and  the  SA  and,  on  the  front, the Wehrmacht Divisions  and the
Divisions  of the SS, all existed  under  the same duplication principle, as
did the two Intelligence Services, the Gestapo and the Abwehr.
     This multiplication of institutions can only be explained by the desire
of  the ruling  class  to  guarantee the stability  of  its  regime.  It  is
important  to clarify this,  so  that  one can understand the role of Soviet
military intelligence in Soviet society and in the international arena, and,
in addition, the reason why this organisation has remained throughout Soviet
history  largely independent from the  KGB,  in spite of the many ordeals it
has been subjected to.
<ul><a name=3></a><h2>PART ONE</h2></ul>
     Chapter One
     The Triumvirate
     The Party, the KGB and the  Army form  the triumvirate which  rules the
Soviet Union. All other  institutions  and  organisations,  including  those
which appear officially to wield State power, occupy a subordinate position.
But  no  single  one  of  the three  holds  absolute  power.  They  are  all
interdependent  and  have  to  share  power  with their rivals. There  is  a
constant underlying  struggle between these three forces, with  attacks  and
retreats,  bloody  skirmishes,   victories,  defeats,   armistices,   secret
alliances and permanent treachery.
     The Party cannot exist  without a continuous repression of  the people,
in other  words without the KGB.  The  KGB in  turn cannot  exist  without a
continuous fanning of the flames of communist fanaticism and  the  deception
of the people, in other words  without the Party. Each of the  two considers
its own function  to be the important  one  and  the  function of its  rival
merely supplementary. Thus  the Party and the KGB are striving for undivided
rule, but with this in mind each understands that it is not possible to kill
off its  rival. Too much depends on  the continued existence of that  rival.
Both  the  Party  and  the  KGB  need  the  Army, which plays the part of  a
performing  crocodile,  ensuring  a quiet  life  for the other  two. In  the
triumvirate system the Army is the most powerful element but it is  also the
most deprived as regards its  rights. Unlike the Party and the KGB, the Army
has never played the leading role  in the trio. Should this ever happen, the
Party  and  the  KGB would be  swiftly  destroyed.  The  fact  is that  this
crocodile does not need either the Party or  the KGB. Its natural state is a
free  life in a swamp, enjoying the ability to gobble up whatever it wishes.
Both the Party and  the KGB are Perfectly well aware  that they, in the role
of trainers  of the performing crocodile, would be its first victims  should
the crocodile ever be set at liberty. So why has the crocodile never gobbled
up its trainers?
     The  Party and the KGB hold  the crocodile firmly in check  by means of
two strong leashes. The Party leash is called the Political Department, that
of the KGB the Special Department. Every organ of the Army is  penetrated by
the Political Department of the Party and the Special Department of the KGB.
On those occasions  when the Army has attacked the Party, which has happened
several times, beginning with the military  opposition of the  twenties, the
Tchekists of the KGB have come into action  and quickly  gained control over
dissident elements  in  the Army.  When  the Army has  attacked the KGB,  as
happened after the  death of Stalin, the Party has gone into  action against
it. And at times when the KGB has been plotting against the Party, the Party
has invariably allowed  the crocodile to take  a bite  at the Tchekists, but
not  a bite to the death. After such incidents the situation has returned to
normal -the crocodile's trainers have manipulated their  leashes  in such  a
way and from different sides that it is impossible for any quarrel to have a
conclusion. They have even been able to  give the crocodile a few kicks and,
if  necessary, to direct it  to another side, as  it  is said  'against  any
aggressor'.   Its   dependent   situation   notwithstanding,  the  Army   is
sufficiently strong sometimes to pull its two trainers  after it. Thus it is
not  possible for the  Army to be  left out of the triumvirate. None of  the
remaining inhabitants of the  Soviet  Union has any independent part to play
in the concert.  They  fulfil  an  auxiliary role.  They supply food  to the
trainers and the crocodile,  put on their make-up for the show, announce the
different acts and collect money from the terrified spectators.
     The general staff of the Soviet Army is the brain of the crocodile, and
military intelligence is its eyes and ears. The GRU is a part of the general
staff,  in  other words a part  of the  brain. In fact it is that part which
analyses what the eyes see and  the  ears hear,  the part which concentrates
the unblinking eyes of the crocodile onto  the  most interesting targets and
trains its ears  to hear with precision every  rustle of the night. Although
the crocodile is firmly tied to the Party and the KGB, the general staff and
the integral GRU are practically  independent of  external control. Why this
should be is  explained by the Party's  experience. In the period before the
war, the Party supervised the general staff  so carefully, and the Tchekists
insisted strongly on  the observance of every minute directive of the Party,
that the general staff  completely lost the ability to  think independently.
As a result  the  crocodile,  despite its enormous size, completely lost its
presence of mind, its speed of reaction and any capability to think and take
independent   decisions  All  this  brought  the  system   to  the  edge  of
catastrophe, as the Army became practically incapable of fighting. The Party
learnt from this sad experience and  realised that  it must not interfere in
the working of the crocodile's brain, even if this brain had ceased to think
along  Party lines. The Party  and  the KGB preferred, for purely  practical
reasons, to keep only the  body  of the  crocodile under control  and not to
interfere with the work of its brain, of its sharp ears and piercing eyes.
     Chapter Two
     History
     Soviet  military  intelligence [The  Russian  version  of  the  English
'intelligence' - razvedka  - has wider significance and includes  everything
we understand by the terms 'intelligence', 'reconnaissance',  'surveillance'
and  all activity  governing collection and processing of  information about
actual  or  potential enemies.]  and  its superior  organ, the  GRU, are  an
integral part of the Army.  The history of Soviet intelligence can therefore
only be  surveyed in the light of the history of the development of the Army
and consequently in the light of the continuous struggle  between  the Army,
the  Party  and the  KGB. From the  moment  of the  creation  of  the  first
detachment  of  the  Red Army,  small intelligence groups were formed within
these detachments quietly and  often  without  any order from above. As  the
regular  army  developed into  newly-formed regiments, brigades,  divisions,
army corps and armies, so these  intelligence organs developed with it. From
the  outset, intelligence  units  at  all  levels  were subordinated  to the
corresponding staffs. At the same time the superior echelons of intelligence
exercised  control  and  direction  of the  lower  echelons.  The  chief  of
intelligence  of   an  army  corps,  for  example,  had  his  own   personal
intelligence unit and in addition directed the chiefs of intelligence of the
divisions  which  formed  a  part  of   his   army  corps.  Each  divisional
intelligence chief, in his  turn, had his own intelligence  unit at the same
time as directing  the activities of the intelligence chiefs of the brigades
which formed his division. And so on down the scale. On 13 June 1918 a front
was formed,  for the  first  time  in the composition of the Red Army.  This
front  received the name  of the Eastern  Front, and in it  there were  five
armies and the Volga military flotilla.  On the same day there was created a
'registrational'  (intelligence)  department  in  the  Eastern   Front.  The
department had the intelligence chiefs of all  five armies and  the flotilla
reporting to it.  These intelligence chiefs of the  front possessed a number
of aircraft  for aerial reconnaissance,  some cavalry  squadrons  and,  most
important,  an  agent network. The agent network  for the Eastern Front  was
first formed on the  basis of  underground organisations  of Bolsheviks  and
other  parties  which  supported  them.  Subsequently the  network grew and,
during the advances  of the Eastern Front in the Urals and in Siberia, agent
groups and organisations intervened in the rear of the enemy before the main
forces attacked. Subsequent  to the formation  of  the  Eastern  Front,  new
fronts were  added  to  the  Red Army:  the  Southern,  Ukrainian, Northern,
Turkistan and, later, Caucasian,  Western, South- Eastern, North-Eastern and
others. The intelligence set-up for each front was organised in the same way
as that for the Eastern Front. There were also some independent and separate
armies which did  not form part of the  fronts, and these,  as  a  rule, had
their own independent networks.
     In  the spring of  1918, besides the  agent, aerial and other  types of
intelligence  services,  the diversionary  intelligence  service  came  into
being. These diversionary detachments reported to the intelligence chiefs of
fronts, armies,  corps and sometimes divisions, and were called the 'cavalry
of special  assignments'. Formed from  the best cavalrymen in the Army, they
dressed in the uniform of the enemy and were used to carry out deep raids in
the enemy's rear, to take prisoners - especially staff officers - to collect
information on enemy positions and activities and to undermine and sometimes
physically  destroy the  enemy's  command  structure.  The  number  of these
diversionary  units  and their numerical strength  constantly  increased. In
1920, on the Polish Front, on  the  staff of the Soviet  forces, there was a
separate cavalry  brigade for 'special assignments'  with a strength of more
than two  thousand cavalrymen, and this was  on top of several regiments and
separate squadrons. All these units were  dressed  in  Polish  uniform. Much
later these diversionary units received the name  Spetsnaz, now given to all
special forces of the GRU.
     >From  its  inception,  military  intelligence  suffered  the  greatest
Possible antagonism from the Tchekists. The Tcheka had its own central agent
network and an agent network in local areas. The Tchekists jealously guarded
their  right to have secret  agents and could not  resign themselves  to the
idea that anyone else was operating similar secret networks. The Tcheka also
had  units  of  'special assignments' which  carried out raids, not  in  the
enemy's rear, but in  its own rear,  destroying those who were  dissatisfied
with the communist order.
     During the civil war the  Tcheka strove to unite all special assignment
units under  its own control.  Several cases are  recorded  of the Tchekists
trying  to  take over organs  of military  intelligence.  One  such  attempt
occurred on 10 July 1918 when the Tcheka shot the whole staff of the Eastern
Front intelligence  department, which had been in existence for only twenty-
seven  days, together with the  entire  staff of the front and the commander
himself,  M. A. Muravev, who had  been trying  to intervene in favour of his
intelligence  department.  The  whole  of  the   agent  system  of  military
intelligence passed into the control of the Tchekists, but this brought  the
front to the very  edge of catastrophe.  The new commander, I.  I. Vatsetis,
and his chief  of staff had no intelligence service of their  own, and  were
unable  to  ask for the  necessary  information.  They  could  only  request
information in a very tactful way, being well aware of the Tcheka's attitude
to those it disliked. (As regards  Vatsetis the Tchekists  did  indeed shoot
him, but much later.)
     Naturally while the agent  network was under the control of the Tcheka,
its own work was given priority,  and any  tasks set it by the  Army Command
were given very low priority. This of course brought the forces very near to
complete defeat. If the army intelligence service is separated from the army
staff, then the brain becomes  nothing  more  than the  brain of a blind and
deaf man. Even  if the blind man  receives  essential information  from  one
source  or  another, his reaction  will  still  be slow  and  his  movements
imprecise. The leader  of the  Red Army, Trotsky, placed an ultimatum before
Lenin:  either give  me an independent military intelligence service or  let
Dzerzhinsky lead the Army with his Tchekists.
     Lenin  knew  what the Tcheka was capable of but he  also  knew that its
capabilities were  extremely one-sided. He therefore ordered Dzerzhinsky not
to  interfere  in matters of military  intelligence.  In spite  of this, the
Tcheka's  attempts  to swallow up  military  intelligence went on, and these
efforts still continue on a reduced scale up to the present day.
     Towards the end of  1918 the organisation of military intelligence from
regimental staff level  up  to the level of front staff  had been  virtually
completed.  There  remained  only one staff  which as deprived  of  its  own
intelligence  service  of the Republic,  the staff of the  Red Army (at that
time  called  the Field Staff, later the General Staff). For this reason the
general staff remained blind and deaf,  obtaining  information indispensable
to its work  at secondor  third-hand.  In addition to this, the absence of a
superior  intelligence  organ meant a  complete lack of co-ordination of the
front intelligence  services. Military  intelligence had acquired  a pyramid
structure, but the top of the pyramid was missing. The Chief of the Army and
in charge of all military  production, Leon Trotsky several times approached
Lenin  with  the  demand that  he  should create  such  a superior  military
intelligence organ. Understanding  the necessity for the creation of such an
organ, but realising that this would inevitably mean a strengthening  of the
position  of Trotsky, Lenin  prevaricated  and repeatedly refused  Trotsky's
suggestion.  At  the  beginning  of autumn, the  position of  the communists
worsened sharply. Production, fuel and political crises  became more  acute.
Armed uprisings were taking  place  against  the communists.  There  was  an
attempt  on the  life of  Lenin himself.  In  order to  save the  regime the
communists decided  on a  desperate  measure.  In each town and village they
would take  hostages  and,  in the case  of the  slightest manifestation  of
discontent among the  inhabitants, these  hostages would be shot. The Soviet
state was saved, by mass executions. Then another problem arose. The Tcheka,
released  from  its restraints and drunk with blood, got out  of control. In
Tver  and  Torzhok the  Tchekists,  together  with  the hostages,  destroyed
communist leaders  who displeased  them. One  threat to the stability of the
state  had been replaced  by another, far worse. Lenin,  not yet  completely
recovered, immediately resumed day-to-day  leadership.  Without  restricting
the terror, he took  a number of  steps to control it. The most important of
his decisions were, firstly, to give to the People's Commissariats (i.e. the
ministries), the provincial and town committees the  right to  take  part in
court  cases  against arrested communists. A communist would be declared not
guilty  if  two  members of the  Party  Committee testified  in  his favour.
Secondly,  Lenin directed his attention  to the  annulment of  the  Tcheka's
monopoly of secret activity. He  finally accepted Trotsky's proposal  and on
21  October  1918  signed a  decree,  creating  a  superior organ  of Soviet
military intelligence which was  to be called the Registrational Directorate
of the Field Staff of the Republic.
     The  newly  created  directorate  did  not  increase  or  decrease  the
importance  of the  front  and  army intelligence services,  it  merely  co-
ordinated them. But at this time the directorate began the creation of a new
network of agents which could  be active  in countries all  over the  world,
including  those  where the front networks already had  active  agents.  The
organisation created in 1918 has, in principle, survived to the present day.
Certainly the founding rules  are fully  applicable to  our own time.  These
are,  firstly,  that each  military  staff  must have  its  own  independent
intelligence set-up. Secondly, the intelligence set-up of subordinate staffs
is to be fully under the command of the intelligence of superior formations.
Thirdly, the  agent network must be part of  the composition  of the general
staff  intelligence network and  part  of the  composition of the front  and
fleet intelligence services.  (In  peace-time this means  military districts
and groups of forces.) Fourthly, diversionary intelligence is subsidiary  to
agent intelligence.  It must be  found  on  front  or  fleet level, military
districts  and  groups  of  forces  and also  at the  level  of  armies  and
flotillas. And, fifthly  and most importantly, military intelligence must be
quite  separate  from  the  organs of  enforcement  and  their  intelligence
services. Since 1918, each one of these rules has been broken at least once,
if not more often, but invariably the mistake has been summarily corrected.
     The  creation of the  GRU  [The GRU,  like the KGB,  has  been  through
several   name  changes  in  its   history;  at  this  time  it  was  called
'Registraupr', later 'Razvedupr'. For our present purposes the name GRU will
be used consistently.] was not only an  act of  self-preservation on Lenin's
part  from  the ravages  of the  Tcheka, but  also a concession to  Trotsky.
Having entrusted this weapon  to Trotsky and  the Army, Lenin was careful to
equip  it  with a safety device by  the name of Simon Ivanovich Aralov,  who
came   from  the  V.  Tcheka.  On  becoming  chief   of  the  registrational
directorate,  Aralov  formally remained a  member  of the collegium  of  the
Tcheka.  This step was taken in the interests of subterfuge, and even up  to
the present day has confused many researchers. Remaining formally within the
Tcheka, Aralov, from the first day of his work in military intelligence, had
to become a rival and consequently enemy of the Tchekists.  This had entered
into Lenin's  calculations; he had  not been slow to  see  that it  would be
impossible for Aralov  to  avoid daily skirmishes with the  Tchekists on the
most  mundane  questions,  and   that   this  would  inevitably  lead  to  a
confrontation which would preclude any possibility of Aralov being exploited
as a trusted Tchekist. But this was  not  all.  In the case of any agreement
with the Army, not one of the Army's chiefs would dare  to trust Aralov. The
GRU  would be a part of the Army but the Army  would not be able to make use
of the GRU in the struggle against the Party and the Tcheka.
     Lenin's calculations proved themselves sound remarkably quickly. In the
spring of 1919 the  reinforced army under  Trotsky's leadership openly  came
out against the  Party's meddling in the affairs of the Army. A united group
of  Army  delegates,  the  so-called  'Military  Opposition',  at the eighth
congress of the  Party in March 1919,  demanded de facto independence of the
Army from Party influences. At that  time it  was still permitted to express
personal opinions at party conferences, and more  than 100 delegates  out of
269  declared themselves  in favour  of the military  programme. There  were
widespread abstentions  and  the Party and the Tcheka found themselves  in a
minority at their own conference.
     Only  a few  votes  were necessary  to  secure the  complete  and legal
victory of  the  Army, but at this  point  the delegates from  the  military
intelligence  service, knowing  the heavy hand of Aralov, maintained  an icy
silence  and strict  neutrality. Then  at the  most dramatic  moment  of the
session Aralov spoke critically  of the military opposition, after which the
delegates of the military intelligence service  with one voice supported the
Party.  The  number  of supporters  of  the  military opposition  shrank  to
ninety-five,  a  clear  defeat. The session closed  with  a victory for  the
Party. The military opposition crumbled and many of its members  never again
took any action against the  Party.  The  Army  had learnt a lesson.  In the
struggle  against  the  Party,  never count on  the  support of the military
intelligence  service.  Emboldened  by  victory,   the  Tcheka  renewed  its
penetration of the Army. Many unrepentant members of the military opposition
were arrested  and  shot. The  humiliation  of the  Army inevitably affected
military intelligence too, and on 13 May 1919 the Tchekists executed members
of  the staff of military intelligence in the  7th Army who  had  displeased
them.  Military  intelligence  naturally  objected sharply to  the  Tcheka's
taking the law into its own  hands, and from that time on it was  its  sworn
enemy.  Lenin  was  delighted.  Military   intelligence  henceforth  was  an
inseparable  part of the Army, but its chief was the personal enemy of  both
the  Army and  the  Tcheka. Another  unwritten rule  was established  in the
organisation  of the  GRU,  too, which was that the chief of the GRU must be
appointed only  from among the  senior officials of the Tcheka secret police
(historically known as the  V. Tcheka, GPU,  OGPU, NKVD, NKGB, MGB, MVD  and
KGB and  unofficially  as 'the Organs').  This  rule  has also  been  broken
several times, but the Party has always been able to correct its  mistake in
time.
     The agent network of the GRU  was reinforced at almost lightning speed.
There  are  several  reasons  for  this. Firstly,  inside  Russia  after the
Revolution,  in  her  central provinces  alone,  there were  more than  four
million foreigners: Germans, Austrians, Hungarians, Poles, Slovaks,  Czechs,
Koreans, Bulgars,  Serbs,  Croats  and  others.  Most  of them  were  former
prisoners of war.  More  than  three  hundred  thousand of them  voluntarily
enlisted  in  the Red  Army. There was no need to recruit such  people.  The
overwhelming majority of them were convinced, fanatical communists. Military
intelligence simply  sent  them  off to their  own countries  as GRU agents.
Secondly, after  the Revolution Moscow  became  the Mecca  of communism, and
after the foundation of the Comintern, communists from all countries flocked
to Moscow. The  Comintern  openly  declared as its  aim the  destruction  of
capitalism, and in  this manifesto it was helped  from all sides, the Tcheka
and  the GRU  in  particular  developing their espionage activities.  On the
orders of the Comintern [The Communist International, grouping  together the
communist parties of  the world and declaring itself as 'the headquarters of
the worldwide communist revolution'.], thousands  of communists spread  into
foreign  states  worldwide  under  the  control  of  the Soviet intelligence
organisations.  Some of  these, like the German communists Richard Sorge and
Karl  Ramm, the  Finnish communist Otto Kusinien, the Hungarian Sandor Rado,
are  now  well  known to  history,  but  thousands  more  remained  unknown,
activists  labouring strenuously to fulfil the will  of Soviet intelligence.
Thirdly, after the Revolution millions of emigres appeared  from Russia, all
over the world. Any Soviet intelligence  officer  who had undergone the most
elementary linguistic training  could  move  about freely  from  country  to
country without attracting the slightest suspicion.
     External circumstances  favoured communism too. After  the First  World
War  the world veered sharply towards communist doctrines. Communist parties
were  strong  and  united.  In Germany  and  Hungary  there  were  communist
revolutions.  The  heat of  the conflagration was felt in Spain, France  and
China.  Soviet  intelligence  skilfully exploited the  situation  which  was
unfolding.  The First World War also left behind a legacy  of  despair - the
world had given way and there were  many people who had lost their hopes and
ideals.  Embittered and depressed, their recruitment presented no difficulty
whatsoever.  In one  of  the  early  GRU  instruction  manuals there  is the
following advice: 'If you need  a facilities agent (a radio  operator, owner
of a safe house or transmission point) find a tall handsome man who has lost
a leg or an arm in the war.'
     One last, but by no means negligible factor,  is that Russia has always
possessed  too  much gold.  After  the  Revolution,  mountains of  gold from
millions of people killed in the torture chambers of Soviet power were added
to the State Treasury.  In  addition to this,  communists plundered churches
all  over Russia which from ancient  times had been famous for their wealth.
Great  profit  was harvested from the  domes  of the richest cathedrals, for
these were roofed with solid  gold. In looting  the churches, the communists
said, 'For the needs of the world revolution.' What they meant was, 'For the
needs of espionage.'
<ul><a name=4></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     There were many  elementary errors  and  failures in the  work of these
early  field officers  who  had no  experience whatsoever.  For example, the
counter-intelligence officers of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, which at the
time were independent states, simply told  any suspicious person who claimed
to  be a  fugitive Russian officer, or engineer or doctor, to tie a necktie.
In 1920, by this method alone,  more than forty  GRU agents were unmasked in
these three  small  countries. The  GRU was unperturbed  by  these failures,
however, its philosophy being that if it could not have quality  it would go
for quantity. It  was an astute  calculation. If one agent in a hundred sent
abroad showed himself to be talented, and his natural talent made up for his
lack of education, then that was enough. Nobody was worried about the agents
who were discovered. Let them get out of  the mess if they could. The Soviet
Union  will  never admit that  the  people  it sends  out  belong to  Soviet
intelligence.
     This large-scale attack was highly successful. Out  of the thousands of
intelligence agents sent abroad,  some dozen began to give positive results.
The help of communists abroad also began to tell. Gradually quality began to
creep into  the work of the GRU. One of the first outstanding successes  was
the  creation  of  the  so-called 'Mrachkovski  Enterprises'  or, as it  was
officially   called   in   GRU  documents,   'the   network   of  commercial
undertakings'. Jacob  Mrachkovski (his brother  was a member  of the Central
Committee) was  sent to Germany where  he organised a small shop and then  a
small  factory.  Subsequently  he  bought,  in  fictitious   names,  several
factories in  France,  Great Britain, Canada, the United States and  finally
China. The money put into these undertakings quickly grew and, after several
years, the Mrachovski undertakings began to show profits of tens of millions
of pounds.  The money earned  was  used by the  GRU  as its chief  source of
'clean' money, that is, money which had  never  been on Soviet territory and
consequently could be used  for agents' operations. In addition to obtaining
money the Mrachkovski undertakings were  widely used for the legalisation of
newly posted  intelligence officers  who by now were beginning to  be better
trained. Journeying  from  country to country,  they found help  and support
from the Mrachkovski network. They got themselves jobs and after some months
received the most laudatory references and  went off  into  other  countries
where  the same thing  took place. This went  on until the agent was able to
stand on his own two  feet. The security of the network was so tight that no
undertaking  ever  suspected  the existence of another. Mrachkovski  himself
travelled all over  the world, buying up new  enterprises, installing one or
two  of his  own people and  obtaining perfectly legal and  highly lucrative
licences and patents.
     Relations with  the Tchekists were  gradually stretched to their limit.
The  Party was  striving to inflame the hostility  between the  GRU and  the
Organs of State. Lenin  made a great success of this, as did his successors.
The next conflict broke  out  in  the spring of 1920. Both Lenin and Trotsky
considered themselves outstanding thinkers, theoreticians and practical men;
men  of  deep  knowledge  as  regards  military  affairs  and  international
relations.  Naturally neither one nor the other took any notice of evaluated
intelligence. They both demanded  that  the intelligence  material should be
laid  before them 'grey' and  unevaluated: they  would then  draw their  own
conclusions and analyse the material  on the basis  of Marxist doctrine. But
Marxism had very precisely and categorically foretold that  there would be a
world war in Europe which would be  the last war of mankind. The imperialist
war would  develop  into a worldwide  revolution,  after which a golden  age
would begin. Yet the  war  had finished two  years before and  no  worldwide
revolution  had happened. Intelligence  reported that there were no signs of
this revolution  coming  about,  so  both  Lenin  and  Trotsky  were  either
compelled to admit that Marxism was wrong or  to take measures to  bring the
revolution  about. They  decided  to  trigger off  a  revolution in  Europe,
starting  with Poland. Intelligence assessments were ignored, and  naturally
the adventure ended  in complete  failure. Both  the  organisers immediately
started to hunt for  a scapegoat.  The only  possible  explanation  for  the
scandal was  that the  intelligence  service had done  its work badly. Lenin
announced to the rank and file of  the Party, 'We have suffered this  defeat
as a result of the negligence of the intelligence service.' But the  GRU was
a completely unknown entity, even to some of the highest  representatives of
the Soviet bureaucracy, and much more so to the rank-and-file Party members.
All eyes turned towards the Tchekists. Their  unpopularity among the people,
even before this,  was evident. After  Lenin's announcement  their authority
finally fell. Dzerzhinsky caused  a  scandal  in  the  Kremlin and  demanded
explanations  from  the Politburo. In order to  calm  the  Tchekists  and to
support his own version of the story, Lenin permitted the Tchekists to purge
the GRU.  The first  bloody  purge took place  in  November 1920. On Lenin's
orders  hundreds  of  intelligence  officers  who  had allegedly  failed  to
evaluate the situation correctly were shot.
     Up to  this time  there had  been no  need  to  account  for the  GRU's
activities, but now  information was made  available to  some Party members.
This  has led some specialists  to the mistaken conclusion that  the GRU did
not exist until this time.
     However, the GRU did not take long to recover from the 1920 Purge. This
may be explained mainly by the fact that the overseas organs of the GRU were
practically untouched, and  this for  eminently sound reasons. Neither Lenin
nor  Trotsky  had  any idea of  shooting the intelligence officers who  were
overseas, not only because they  were manifestly  innocent, but also because
their deaths would have absolutely no salutary effect on others since nobody
would hear about them, not even the many members of the  Central  Committee.
The other  reason for  the  quick recovery  of  the GRU was  that  its agent
intelligence network in the military  districts  was also left untouched. At
the  end of  the  civil war,  the  fronts  were  tranformed  into  'military
districts',  but the chain of command in the new  districts  did not undergo
any essential  changes.  A  'registration'  department was  included  on the
strength  of the staff  of each district  which continued in  peace-time  to
carry on agent intelligence work in countries where the district would  have
to carry out military  activities in any future war.  Up to the time of  the
1920  purge there were fifteen military  districts and two fleets in the Red
Army.  They  all  carried   out,  independently  from   each  other,   agent
intelligence work of a very intensive nature.
     The  internal military  districts were no exception. Their intelligence
centres  were moved out to  the frontiers and it  was  from  there  that the
direction of agents was undertaken. Each internal military district also has
its tasks in wartime, and its intelligence work is based around these tasks.
The  direction  of  activities  of a  frontier  district  is  very precisely
defined;  at   the   same  time   the  internal  district,  independent   of
circumstances, may operate in different directions.  Consequently its  agent
network in peacetime operates in different directions, too. For  example, in
1920 agents of the Moscow  military district operated  on the territories of
Poland, Lithuania (at that time still independent) and Finland. This  system
has prevailed in  all respects, except  that the  districts  and fleets have
become  more numerous, as also has money available for intelligence.  We are
richer now than we were then.
<ul><a name=5></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     After 1927 Soviet military intelligence  began to blossom. This was the
year in which the first  five-year  plan  was  drawn up, which aimed (as all
subsequent five-year  plans have) exclusively at the growth  of the military
potential of the country. The plan stipulated the creation and speedy growth
of the tank, ship-building, aviation  and artillery  industries. The  Soviet
Union set itself the target of creating the most powerful army in the world.
The Soviet leadership made haste and demanded  from its designers  not  only
the creation of new kinds of weaponry and military technology, but also that
Soviet armaments must be  the best  in  the world. Monumental  sums of money
were  spent to attain  this aim:  prac-tically  the  whole  of Russia's gold
reserves  was  thrown  into  the  task.  At   Western  auctions  the  Soviet
authorities  sold  off Russian  corn  and wood, pictures  by  Rembrandt  and
Nicholas II's stamp collection. A tidy sum of money was realised.
     All  GRU  residents  received  book-length  lists  of  foreign military
technology which they  would have  to  steal in  the near future.  The lists
included  equipment for bombers and fighters,  anti-aircraft  and  anti-tank
guns, howitzers and mortars, submarines and torpedo boats,  radio valves and
tank engines, the  technology for  the production of aluminium and equipment
for boring out gun barrels. Yet another GRU tradition first saw the light of
day in this period: that  of stealing  analogous kinds of  armaments  at the
same time  in different countries and then studying them to select the best.
Thus, at the beginning of the 1930s, Soviet military  intelligence succeeded
in  stealing  samples or plans of torpedoes in  Italy,  France,  the  United
States, Germany and Great Britain. It  was hardly surprising that the Soviet
torpedo, manufactured  in  the  shortest  possible  time, conformed  to  the
highest international standards. Sometimes  Soviet copiers selected the best
assemblies and components and constructed out of them a new type which often
turned out to  be the very  best  in the world. Luck too was on  the side of
Soviet military intelligence. Nobody took  very seriously the efforts of the
Soviet Union in the military sphere, and few countries went  to great  pains
to hide their secrets  from it. Communists the  world over  were obsessed by
the idea of helping Soviet intelligence, Soviet residents were able to throw
their money round, and finally the  great depression threw into the  arms or
Soviet  intelligence  thousands  of  opportunists  who  feared losing  their
factories, workshops or offices. Soviet intelligence,  by the  beginning  of
the  1930s,  had  attained unprecedented  heights  of  power.  Within Soviet
territory  the  GRU  had   practically  no  political   influence.  In   the
international sphere it did not very much seek  to enter  into the political
life  of  parties  and states, but in the  field of clean espionage  the GRU
already  clearly occupied the leading position  in the world,  having by far
overtaken the political intelligence work of the OGPU. At  the  beginning of
the 1930s the  GRU budget was  several times larger than the overseas budget
of the OGPU. This situation remains true today.
     The  system in  use  today of  recruitment  and  running of  agents had
already  fully  developed  by the end  of the 1920s.  In agent organisations
directly subordinated  to the  GRU the recruitment and running of agents was
in the  hands of 'illegals', that is,  GRU officers posted abroad undercover
with  forged  documents and offices,  posing  as Soviet  diplomats, consuls,
trade  representatives,  correspondents and  so on. In  agent  organisations
subordinated to military districts and fleets the recruitments of agents was
carried out from  the territory of the Soviet Union. Only rarely did certain
officers of  the  intelligence directorates  of districts travel abroad with
forged  documents for  short periods.  Before diplomatic  recognition of the
Soviet Union, emphasis was concentrated on the  activities of  illegals, but
after  its recognition,  undercover  residencies  were added to the numerous
illegal residencies.  The  GRU illegals  and  undercover  residencies  acted
independently from  each other but  in the pre-war period the communications
of   illegals  from  GRU  residencies  with   the   Centre  were  frequently
accomplished through the Soviet embassies.  This was a very serious mistake.
With  the beginning of the war when  the embassies were closed or blockaded,
the communication with illegals  was disrupted. The mistake was subsequently
rectified. Military  district intelligence always  operated independently of
the GRU illegals and Soviet embassies, and for this reason at  the beginning
of  the  war  it  was  practically  unharmed.  Gradually a  tendency  became
noticeable in the  operations of military district intelligence  services to
limit the use of Soviet officers  even  for short  trips abroad.  Faced with
wartime conditions  the  military  district  intelligence services  began to
recruit and run their agents only from  Soviet territory. The recruitment of
new agents was carried out either on Soviet territory or on the territory of
neighbouring countries by means of agents who had been recruited earlier.
     There  is  an  interesting  story to be  told  about the recruitment of
agents at this time, whose moral holds as true today. In the pre-war period,
recruitment  took  up little  time. The Comintern simply made a decision and
immediately scores, sometimes hundreds of  communists became  Soviet  secret
agents. In the interests of  successful agent work, the GRU  always demanded
from  them  that they should publicly  resign from the  communist party. The
vast majority accepted  this  without  demur.  After  all,  it  was  only  a
camouflage, a Bolshevik  manoeuvre to  help defeat the lass enemy. Sometimes
however,  there  were communists who were unwilling. In Germany,  one  group
agreed to the GRU's demands only on condition  that it was accepted into the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The demand was a simple one,  for it is
not difficult for  the GRU to write out  a dozen new party cards, and as the
new agent group was working so successfully, the GRU did not want to refuse.
At a routine meeting the GRU case officer, an employee of the Soviet embassy
in  Berlin, informed  the group's leader that their demands had been met. He
congratulated  the group on becoming  members of the CPSU and informed them,
in conclusion,  that the General Secretary  of  the Party  himself,  comrade
Stalin, had written out the party  cards. As an exceptional case, the German
communists  had been  accepted without  going  through the candidacy  stage.
Their party cards were naturally to be kept in the Central Committee.
     At this  news  the group's productivity  redoubled. It was  supposed to
receive  a  certain sum of money for its work, but the group members refused
to accept  the money. More than that, they began to  hand over to their case
officers  sums of their own money, in order  to pay their membership fees to
the  Soviet communist  party. Punctually  they handed  over  to  their  case
officers all documents and payslips concerning  their earnings together with
their party  subscriptions. This  took up  a great deal  of time during  the
agent meetings, but the Germans were working very  productively  and  nobody
wanted to offend them.
     Some time later, the Gestapo got on their trail, but all the members of
the group managed to escape  into Austria, then to Switzerland  and  finally
through France to  Spain where the civil war was going  on. From Spain  they
were brought to Moscow, Terrible disappointments awaited them in the capital
of the Proletariat of all the world, the chief of which was that nobody into
at any time written out their party cards, or accepted them into  the Soviet
communist party. The  GRU officials had of  course assumed that  the  agents
would never set foot in the Soviet  Union on that therefore it would be very
easy  to dupe them. However, on their arrival in Moscow, the first thing the
agents  did  was to declare a hunger strike  and demand a meeting  with  the
higher leadership of the GRU. The meeting took  place and the GRU leadership
did all in its power to help the Germans join the party, after going through
the candidate  stage, naturally. But foreigners can only be accepted  in the
CPSU through the Central  Committee, and the natural questions arose:  'Were
you ever members of the communist party? Why did you leave it?' The fanatics
told  exactly  what had  really  happened but  were  damned out of their own
mouths. To  burn  one's  party card  is a  cardinal sin  - and  the  Central
Committee threw  out their application. The  Germans again declared a hunger
strike and demanded a meeting with Stalin in  person. At this point the NKVD
offered its help to the  Central Committee, but the GRU intervened, being in
no way  desirous that its agents should fall into the hands  of the NKVD. So
the ex-agents ended up in the GRU cellars.
     In  the  meantime, the political situation had changed  sharply. Hitler
had become Stalin's best friend and  the  communists likewise friends of the
fascists. There ensued  an  exchange of gifts  - the most up-to-date  German
military aeroplanes for Stalin (including the top secret ME109,  JU87, JU88,
DO217, HElll and even the ME110) in exchange for the surrender of all German
communists  who had taken political  asylum  in  the Soviet Union.  Hitler's
calculation was  very simple. In the  short time before  war  broke out, the
Russians would not be able to copy the planes,  but he would  have the heads
of  his  political opponents. It was a fruitful deal for Stalin too.  He was
bored with the German communists and now  he would be able  to give them  to
the Gestapo in exchange for the best German  aeroplanes. In addition to  the
ordinary members, there were members of the German Central Committee and the
Politburo, together with the editors of the  communist newspaper. These were
not taken to Germany, but the Gestapo was told it  could shoot them in situ,
in the Moscow area. However, as far as the former GRU agents were concerned,
the decision had been taken not to hand them over. They knew too  much.  The
German embassy in  Moscow  was  informed that they had all died in Spain and
had never got  as far as Moscow. The fascists did not  object  but suggested
they would present one  more aircraft at the same  price. Unfortunately, the
former agents, not knowing anything about the bargaining that was  going on,
again declared a hunger strike, and this decided their fate. The Soviet side
now  admitted to  the  fascists  that  they were in  Moscow and  proposed  a
compromise. The  fascists could  shoot  their  victims  in the  Soviet Union
without talking  to them. The  execution took  place  among  the  huge  coal
bunkers  of the  Kashierski Electric Power Station. Beforehand,  the Gestapo
men  had  personally identified  each  of  the people  to  be  executed  and
photographed them; then, under cover of protracted whistling of locomotives,
they shot  them all. Afterwards, joint detachments of  the GRU, the  Central
Committee of the Soviet communist party and the  Gestapo burnt the bodies in
the furnaces of the power station.
     The Germans' mistake  was threefold:  they believed too quickly  in the
promises of the GRU; they insisted too strongly on  the GRU's fulfilling its
promises; and they  forgot that if somebody puts a high  enough price on the
head of an agent, however  good he  may be, the GRU will  sell  him  without
hesitation.
<ul><a name=6></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     In the meantime the Party, under the leadership of Stalin, arrived face
to  face with  the ultimate  necessity  of subjugating all  layers of Soviet
society and  utterly eradicating dissension. The decision was taken  by  the
Party to  purge the  whole  country of  potential dissidents. Today we  have
irrefutable  proof  that  the  'Great  Terror'  was  carefully  planned  and
prepared. On the testimony  of  A. Avtorhanov  the Central Committee of  the
Party had, as  long  ago  as 13  May 1935, taken the  decision  to  create a
special  security  commission  for  carrying  out  mass repressions  in  the
country, which took place in 1937 to 1938.
     For almost  two years  the  Special Commission prepared the most bloody
page in the history of  mankind. Its  members were  Stalin, Zhdanov, Yezhov,
Shkiriatov, Malenkov and Voyshinski. It is interesting to note that the then
head of  NKVD,  Yagoda, was not  a member of the Commission, and  this was a
sensible move. Before  carrying out its massive blood- letting  of the whole
of  society, the  Party  took pains to purge the surgical instrument itself,
the NKVD organs. The purge began secretly as early as 1935 and at that stage
concerned only the organs and the overseas residencies of the NKVD. In order
not to frighten  anybody,  it was  carried  out  secretly and without public
trials. Naturally it  was  the  GRU which  was entrusted  with the  task  of
purging the  NKVD  overseas organs.  In 1935 Yan Karlovich Berzin, the GRU's
chief, travelled to the Far East  with special powers and a group of trusted
helpers.  Secret  orders  appointing one  I. S.  Unshlikht  and  later S. T.
Uritski as chief of the GRU  were issued. But no order was issued for Berzin
to relinquish his  post.  In  other words,  the appointment  of  Uritski was
simply a cover-up for the long absence of Berzin. In the Far East Berzin and
his assistants secretly liquidated  the leading illegals of the NKVD. In the
following year Berzin, with  his assistants, appeared in Spain. His official
job  was Chief Advisor  to the  Spanish Government, a post in  which  he was
extremely active. Firstly,  he endeavoured to direct the activities  of  the
Spanish Government along lines favourable to Moscow. Secondly, he personally
ran from Spain the whole of the overseas network of the GRU. And finally, he
did not forget his most important task. The head of the Foreign  Directorate
of  the  NKVD, Slutski, was  also in Spain,  also personally supervising the
activities of all his overseas agents. In  all probability Slutski was aware
that  Berzin  and   the   GRU  had  some  connection  with   the  mysterious
disappearance of NKVD illegals. Evidence has been preserved which shows that
Slutski and Berzin had clashes  practically  every day in Spain. However, at
the  same time, the  intelligence  chief of  the NKVD  was  finding  himself
increasingly subject to the chief of Soviet military  intelligence.  At  the
end  of  September 1936 the NKVD chief, Yagoda, was  dismissed from his post
and  the secretary  of  the Central  Committee  of  the  Party,  Ezhov,  was
appointed in his place. Ezhov himself began a most cruel purge of the NKVD -
and  he  no longer  required  the  assistance of  the GRU.  More than  3,000
Tchekists  were  shot  on  Ezhov's  orders,  including  Yagoda  and  Slutski
themselves. It is interesting  to note  that Yagoda's death followed an open
trial,  but Slutski  was  murdered  secretly, in the same way  as  his  best
illegal  residents had been  executed previously.  After the  Party, in  the
person of Ezhov and with the help of the GRU, had purged  the NKVD, the time
came for the Army to be dealt with. This purge began with the liquidation of
the general staff - and  the  complete destruction of  the  GRU. Among those
military leaders first executed together with Marshal Tukhachevski were army
commanders  Yakir  and Uboreevich  and Corps  Commander  Putna,  the  Soviet
military attache in London. As might be expected, all military  attaches are
GRU  officers;  but  Putna  was not  simply  a  military attache. Until  his
appointment to  London he had  been  deputy chief of  the GRU. His execution
served as an extra excuse for the  NKVD to carry out a special purge  in the
ranks of the  GRU. Hatred which  had been collecting for many  years at last
came out into the open. In the course of the purge  first the acting head of
the GRU, Uritski, was arrested  and  shot, and after  him all the  rest. The
NKVD and GRU now exchanged roles.  NKVD men with special powers went  around
the world destroying  both GRU illegals and also those intelligence officers
of the GRU  and NKVD who  had  refused  to return  to the Soviet  Union  and
certain destruction. In  the course of the 1937 purge the GRU was completely
destroyed- even down to the lavatory  attendants  and cooks  on its payroll.
Berzin, back from Spain, had to re-create the GRU from scratch.
<ul><a name=7></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     By  the  autumn  of   1937,  by  a  special  effort  of  the  Comintern
-particularly  in  Spain  with  the help  and coercion of  the International
Brigades - the GRU had  somewhat recovered its strength. A year later Soviet
military  intelligence  had  returned to its  stormy  activities. But in the
summer  of 1938, in the course of a second wave of terror, the GRU was again
destroyed, losing its entire strength. This time Berzin  himself, one of the
cleverest  and  most  successful  leaders  the  GRU  has had, was among  the
victims.
     The blow  delivered automatically meant  a  blow  to  all organisations
subordinate  to  the GRU, that  is to  the intelligence directorates  of the
military  districts. Here the death-dealing whirlwind came  twice, literally
destroying everything. During the pre-war  years,  in the  areas  of western
military districts the intelligence directorates  had extended the  existing
reserves of underground armies in case of the  occupation of these areas  by
an  enemy. Secret  depots and  stores of  weapons  and  explosives  had been
established, radio sets had been  secreted  and  refuges  for  partisans and
intelligence  officers had  been  set  up.  In  the  terror,  all  this  was
destroyed, and  tens of thousands  of trained partisans and saboteurs, ready
to meet the enemy, were shot or perished in prisons and concentration camps.
Military intelligence  ceased  to exist. And not only military intelligence;
the Army had  been bled white, and  military  industry,  too. But Ezhov, the
head of the NKVD,  had made a fatal mistake in taking Berzin's place when he
was  executed  on 29 July 1938. The  very next day, Stalin received only one
report  on both  GRU and NKVD  activities, instead  of  the  usual  two. The
implication was clear: a monopoly  of secret activity had  begun, and Stalin
now had  no way  to  balance  the power  of  the  NKVD.  With  his customary
precision  and  deliberation   he   realised  that  his  control  of  Soviet
intelligence  was slipping  away and the same day, 30 July,  he set in train
the events which would lead to Ezhov's removal and execution.
     In  the winter of 1939/40 there occurred an improbable scandal. The Red
Army,  whose strength at the moment of the attack was more than four million
men, was unable to crush the resistance of the Finnish Army,  whose strength
was only 27,000 men.  Reasons for this  were  quickly found. Of course there
was the  cold. (The German Army's  right  to claim  the same reason for  its
defeat in the winter of 1941 was unanimously  denied.) The second reason was
the  intelligence service.  In all Soviet  historical  works  (which may  be
published only with the permission of the Propaganda Department of the Party
Central Committee), even to this day, the cold and poor intelligence are the
reasons  always given. The Party forgets to specify that  from  1937 to 1939
Soviet military intelligence was  practically  non-existent, at the  Party's
own wish.
     After the Finnish scandal, Stalin did  not order a purge of the GRU. It
is  probable  that at  that  time there  was nobody to purge,  but  he still
ordered the execution of General Proskurov, the new head of the GRU, and his
staff  because of  Proskurov's disagreement with him over the  Hitler-Stalin
pact. In June  1940  General Filipp  Golikov was appointed chief of the GRU.
Under Golikov  the  GRU  was  reborn  amazingly  quickly into  an  effective
intelligence force. There has  been much speculation about this period.  Did
the GRU know of the plans for Germany's  attack on the Soviet Union  or not?
The best answer to  the question  must lie in Golikov's own  survival. Seven
leaders before him and two after him were murdered, yet he went on to become
Stalin's Deputy of Personnel and Marshal  of the Soviet Union. The political
leadership  may not take the right decision,  even with the best information
that Golikov could give, but it will not bite the hand that feeds it.
     The war had  begun with a catastrophic defeat  for the Soviet Union. In
the  first few hours  the German Army  succeeded  in  securing  a  strategic
initiative.  Thousands  of  serviceable  aircraft  were destroyed  on  their
airfields and thousands of tanks burned in their own parks.
     It may have been that  Stalin spared  Golikov  in order to  give him  a
testing assignment. He  was certainly told to take himself abroad and revive
and renew the GRU agent network which had been  cut off immediately. He went
first to England  and then to the United States  and, to give  him  his due,
this time he  succeeded in carrying out his work in an exemplary manner. For
his visits to Great Britain and the United States he naturally did  not  use
faked  documents.  He came,  with a  numerous  entourage, as the head of  an
official  Soviet  military   delegation  to  obtain  American   and  British
armaments. For the chief  of the GRU and his colleagues the  doors of secret
factories and laboratories were opened - the very places Soviet intelligence
had  been trying  for  decades to  penetrate.  This historical visit was the
beginning  of intense  penetration by Soviet  military  intelligence of  the
armaments industries of America and Britain. Golikov  also succeeded, albeit
only temporarily, in establishing  communications with GRU illegals who were
functioning  on territory  occupied by Germany; but this  also signalled the
beginning of GRU penetration of the German general staff from many different
quarters. The  consequences of  this were  that, beginning  with Stalingrad,
even top  secret  plans  of the German  High  Command were known  to  Soviet
front-line  generals before they were known to  the German field commanders.
And the Soviet military  leadership was equally enlightened as to the  plans
of its allies, the Americans and the British. Churchill bears witness to the
fact that Stalin enumerated several points as to the contents of British top
secret plans, though he attributes such enlightenment to  Stalin's genius in
foreseeing the  future. The  only  thing that is not clear is why Stalin did
not display  a similar clairvoyancy with regard  to  Hitler's intentions  in
1941 and the beginning of 1942.
     In  the  autumn  of 1941  Golikov returned from the  United  States, an
another exceptionally  successful visit. He could not, of course,  expect to
keep his post, but he stayed  alive, and even kept his General's rank. On 13
October he was relieved of the command of the GRU and appointed commander of
the 10th Army.
     Later, in 1944, Stalin gave Golikov yet another chance  to  expiate his
guilt with  regard to the sudden German attack. In October he was  appointed
plenipotentiary of  the Council  of People's Commissars  on Questions of the
Repatriation of Soviet Citizens. At  the same time as  he was occupied  with
this task several of the former residents of the GRU in Europe were assigned
to him.  He  acquitted himself again  with  great credit  and, being able to
count  on the help of  the GRU, succeeded  in  returning to the Soviet Union
several  million people who were practically  all shot on arrival. Golikov's
career was on the  up and up, and he eventually  reached the rank of Marshal
of the Soviet Union.
     In the autumn of 1941, after Golikov had relinquished his post, the GRU
was divided into two. One of the  newly-created organisations  was  directly
answerable to Stalin  and entitled the Chief Intelligence Directorate of the
Supreme High Command. In the hands of this organisation was concentrated the
agent network controlled by illegals and undercover residencies of  the  GRU
in a small  number of Soviet embassies. The 'other'  GRU was subordinated to
the  general staff  and preserved  its  former  name  of  Chief Intelligence
Directorate of  the  General Staff.  But now this  junior branch of the  GRU
co-ordinated the  efforts of  intelligence officers on all Soviet  fronts in
action against Germany.  This new set-up was fully justified  at  that time.
The  GRU general staff was freed from  having to  make decisions  on  global
problems which at that moment had lost their importance for the Soviet Union
and instead  was  able to  concentrate  all  its  attention  on carrying out
intelligence  operations  against  German forces. In  order  to  distinguish
between the two GRU's; the term 'strategic  intelligence' was introduced for
the first time  and applied to the  GRU  of the Supreme Command, and the new
title  of  'operational   intelligence'   was  given  to   the  Intelligence
Directorate  of  Fronts  and the GRU  of the general staff  which controlled
these directorates. Both the strategic and operational intelligence services
of the Red Army conducted themselves with great distinction in the course of
the war. The  finest  achievements  of the strategic  agent network  were of
course the penetration of  the German general staff through Switzerland (via
the  illegal residency 'Dora') and the theft  of American atomic  secrets by
way  of  Canada (through the  residency 'Zaria').  Operational  intelligence
meanwhile  developed  activities unparalleled in  scale.  Besides  its agent
intelligence, a very large role was allocated  to diversionary intelligence.
Groups of  guard-minelayers  were  formed  in the intelligence units  of the
fronts and armies whose basic  purpose was  to hunt down the German military
staff.  Parallel with  these  diversionary  elements  of  the GRU, analogous
groups  of NKVD  men  were  in action at the rear of German  forces. Between
these two groups the traditional enmity fostered by the Party continued.
<ul><a name=8></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     After the  war, military  intelligence was  once again fused  into  one
organisation, GRU General Staff,  which independently carried  out strategic
intelligence  and directed operational  and tactical  intelligence.  At this
time the Party and  Stalin took care to weaken  the Army and the Ministry of
State Security, both  of  which had strengthened their  positions during the
war  to such  an  extent that  they  had  stopped  acknowledging  the  civil
leadership,  i.e. the  party. The leading commanders, headed by Zhukov, were
dismissed from the Army and Beria was also deprived of the leadership of the
Tchekists. It would obviously not be a simple matter to expel him, so Stalin
technically promoted him, appointing his deputy to  succeed him, but in fact
this  deprived him of direct leadership  of  the Organs of State because his
title of minister  was taken away. Within the framework of the programme for
weakening the Army and  the Ministry of  State  Security,  Stalin decided to
remove intelligence from both the Army and State Security. This plan was put
into effect in 1947. The GRU and the organs of political intelligence of the
Ministry  of State Security were joined  together in one organisation called
the  KI: the  Committee  of  Information.  The man  closest  to  Stalin  was
appointed  to lead this  organisation,  and  this was  the activist  of  the
Politburo,  Molotov. Thus  the  Army  and Ministry  of  State  Security were
deprived  of  intelligence.  All  intelligence   work  would  henceforth  be
subordinate  to  the Party.  Such a  situation did not  suit the Army or the
Ministry of State Security,  and  they for the first time united against the
Party.
     >From  its  inception the  Committee  of  Information  was  an  utterly
ineffective organisation. The intelligence officers of the Ministry of State
Security  and  the  GRU,   who  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  Committee  of
Information, strove  by  all means to return from under the  control  of the
Party back to their  own former organisations. Both  sets of officers strove
to sabotage the activities of the Committee of  Information. The Ministry of
State  Security and the  Army,  acting in  collusion, informed  the  Central
Committee  that they  could no  longer  work  effectively  since  they  were
receiving their information at  second hand. Then they  exerted  pressure on
their former officers in order to  try  to make the Committee of Information
collapse from inside. The  Central  Committee of  the Party made  efforts to
improve  the effectiveness of the  Committee of  Information. In less than a
year four chiefs were appointed  and dismissed, for the reason that not  one
of them was able to counter the unified strength of the  Ministry  of  State
Security and the Army.  After long struggles behind  the scenes  Abakumov, a
pupil and favourite of Beria, became Chief of the Committee of Information.
     At a stroke, all the intelligence services passed to the control of the
Ministry of State  Security. Stalin immediately  saw that a mistake had been
made. In his opinion, the creation of  one intelligence  service, even if it
was  under the leadership of the  Party, must  sooner or later  lead to  the
Tchekists  seizing  power over this  organisation, and  this  would mortally
endanger  the  Party. There  was  only  one  way  out  of such a  situation:
immediately  to  liquidate  the  Committee  of Information  and  divide  the
intelligence  service into two hostile  camps - military intelligence to the
Army,  and political intelligence to State Security. But the coup was not an
easy one.  To get round the problem, the Party naturally found support  from
the Army  which had  not been at all happy with State Security's monopoly of
the intelligence service. On the instructions of Stalin, the first deputy of
the chief of the  general  staff,  General Shtemyenko, made a  report to the
Politburo on  the subject of the 'blind  general staff, after  which the GRU
was removed  from  the control of  Abakumov and given  to the  Army. For his
distinguished services,  Stalin immediately appointed General  Shtemyenko as
chief of  the general staff—the senior curator of the  GRU. After  two years
Shtemyenko and the GRU, seeking to please  Stalin, presented documents about
the existence of  an agreement among subordinates  of Abakumov. Abakumov was
immediately  shot, the Committee of Information finally  abolished, and  the
usual purge carried out in the ranks of State Security.
     But  the Ministry of State Security did not  forgive the general  staff
and the  GRU  for  having taken such liberties. 1952 was  a year of struggle
between the  Politburo  and Stalin. The Ministry of State Security presented
documents which they claimed proved the existence of  a plot in the ranks of
the GRU. This time it was the turn of  the  GRU and all the general staff to
be purged. Stalin  was opposed to  the move,  but  the  Politburo  insisted.
Shtemyenko was  demoted  to Lt-General and expelled from  the general staff.
The action continued against the general staff and the GRU, and even against
Stalin  himself who was removed  as general secretary of the Communist Party
later that year.
     At the beginning of  1953, immediately after the death of Stalin, there
ensued a fierce  squabble among  his  disciples and comrades at arms for the
distribution of the inheritance. The most dangerous pretender  to the throne
was,  of  course,  Beria.  The   united  strength  of  Army  and  Party  was
automatically  against him. Beria  was arrested at  a joint session of Party
and Army leaders  and immediately done away with. After this there began the
usual  persecution  of   the  Organs   of  State.   During   secret  trials,
incriminating documents were produced from the GRU concerning the leaders of
the  Ministry of State  Security and  many  of its  leaders  were shot after
frightful torture.  The torture was  carried out in the GRU cellars on Gogol
Boulevard. At the beginning of 1954 the Ministry  of State Security lost its
status as a ministry and was transformed into a committee.
     Simultaneously  with the  fall of the Ministry  of  State Security, the
Army  acquired more and more weight within the framework of  the State.  The
'Russian  Bonaparte',  Marshal Zhukov,  became  Minister of Defence,  having
returned from  his exile under Stalin. After a short time Zhukov also became
a member of the Politburo. He quickly effected  the return of all the exiled
generals  and marshals and appointed  them to key positions. The Ministry of
State Security  could  not  exercise any  restraint  on Zhukov  and  he  was
therefore  able  to  appoint  Shtemyenko to  the  post of  Chief of the GRU,
reinstating him  as  a full general after his demotion.  The GRU  became  an
organisation solely  dependent  on the Army. Zhukov's  next step was  a blow
against Party influence in the Army. On his orders all political workers and
Party  commissars were expelled  from the  Army.  He  also ordered the Chief
Political  Directorate  of the Soviet Army  to stop interfering any  more in
Army affairs, and at the same time liquidated all the special departments of
State  Security present  in the Army. The crocodile was clearly throwing off
its  bonds. In Politburo  sessions  Zhukov openly contradicted Khruschev and
publicly abused him.
     The party  understood how rashly it had behaved in depriving the KGB of
power, since the Party alone was clearly defenceless against the Army. There
was absolutely no doubt that very soon the Army would become the only master
of  the  situation. But in  October 1957 Zhukov committed  a grave error. He
went on a visit to Yugoslavia and in his  absence, a plenum  of the  Central
Committee of the Party was  hurriedly convened. Zhukov was  secretly removed
from the Politburo and also from his duties  as Minister  of Defence because
of  'bonapartism'. The chief of the GRU, General Shtemyenko,  learned  about
what had happened and  immediately sent a  telegram  of warning to Zhukov in
Yugoslavia,  but  it  was  intercepted  by  the  KGB. Zhukov  returned  from
Yugoslavia  straight  into  renewed  exile.  Shtemyenko followed him,  again
reduced  to  the  rank  of lieutenant- general.  (Some survive  vicissitudes
better than others: under Brezhnev, Shtemyenko was again reinstated.)
<ul><a name=9></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     Now once more the post of chief of the GRU was held  by a member of the
KGB,  Ivan  Serov.  Henceforth  everything  would  go  according to  Lenin's
teachings.  Serov, on  his  appointment, automatically turned  into an arch-
rival and enemy  of  the  KGB, and was  not in the least  interested in  the
fusion  of these two organisations. But since he had  been a general  of the
KGB, the Army could not exploit him against the Party and  the KGB. That was
not all. In order to control the Army in the interests of the Party, General
Golikov, the former chief of  the GRU, was appointed chief  of the Political
Directorate  of the Soviet Army. Golikov was a former Tchekist and political
worker  and he was ready  to serve anybody who  desired his services  and to
report only the data which would please the  leadership.  Such a person  was
eminently suitable as far as the Party was concerned.
     Serov's successor as chief  of the GRU was Colonel-General of  the KGB,
Petr  Ivashutin.  General Yepishev, who  had been from  1951  to 1953 Deputy
Minister of  State Security,  succeeded  Golikov as chief of  the  Political
Directorate of the Soviet Army. In a word, the crocodile was again firmly on
the leash.

     Chapter Three
     The Pyramid
     If  we  approach  the term  GRU in a  formal way  in  order  to explain
everything that is  covered  by  those  three letters, we  shall  get a very
impressive picture but one that is far  from complete. To look at the GRU in
isolation from  its  subordinate organisations is to  look  at  Gengis  Khan
without his innumerable hordes.
     The GRU may formally be described as an immensely powerful intelligence
organisation forming part of the  general staff and acting in the  interests
of the higher  military command of the Soviet Union.  On its strength  there
are more than five thousand senior officers and generals who have specialist
academic qualifications in intelligence matters.  The  GRU has  its  illegal
representatives in every country of  the world. In addition, officers of the
GRU operate under cover in every country of the world as diplomats, military
attaches,  trade  representatives and  so on.  Both  the  illegals  and  the
undercover  officers independently from each other carry out the recruitment
of  agents,  who then,  under the  direction  of  the  GRU steal  top-secret
documents, axe  governments and kill statesmen. The central apparatus of the
GRU processes espionage information coming from a thousand secret agents and
it also carries out cosmic, electronic, air and sea intelligence on a global
scale.
     But  we have not  mentioned the  most important point yet. Up to now we
are talking about Gengis Khan but not his  hordes. What is more important is
that, in addition to all this, in addition to carrying out intelligence work
in  the  interests  of  the  general  staff,  the GRU is  also  the superior
directing  organ   of   the  gigantic   formation  called  Soviet   military
intelligence.
     Organisationally,  the   Soviet  Army  consists   of  sixteen  military
districts,  four  'groups  of  forces'  -  in Germany, Poland,  Hungary  and
Czechoslovakia  -  and four fleets  - the Northern, Pacific,  Black Sea  and
Baltic fleets.  On the staff  strengths of each  district, group  and  fleet
there  are  intelligence  directorates.  In  all, these  directorates number
twenty-four. They are all  subject to  the GRU and are, in effect, a GRU  in
miniature.  Each  of these mini-GRU's  utilises its own facilities. With all
the forces at their disposal, they  gather information on the enemy, both in
peace-time and wartime.
     When we  speak of an intelligence directorate  of a district,  group or
fleet as  a mini-GRU,  this does not in the least mean that the intelligence
directorate   is  small  or  weak.  We  only  mean   that  the  intelligence
directorates  (RU) of staffs are smaller than  the chief directorate of  the
general  staff.  But each  of these twenty-four intelligence directorates is
sufficiently  strong  to  be  able  to recruit  agents independently in  the
territories of countries or  groups of countries which  are in the sphere of
interest  of  the  given  district,  group  or   fleet.  Each   intelligence
directorate possesses  sufficient power  to  be able, without assistance, to
disrupt life in any contiguous country or  group of countries. There is only
one  form  of  intelligence  possessed  by  the  GRU which  the intelligence
directorates  do not possess, and  this is cosmic or  space intelligence. At
the same time, instead of this, they have a perhaps no less important means,
which are  the  diversionary Spetsnaz units. In addition  to ordinary agents
providing secret information, the intelligence  directorates recruit special
agent- terrorists destined to  murder  statesmen or senior military officers
and to  carry out general terror in the  country or group of countries. Thus
each district, group of  forces or fleet  has its own two independent secret
agent networks,  the  first being the  ordinary  espionage network, and  the
second  the  espionage-terrorist network called  Spetsnaz.  To visualize the
strength of  one intelligence directorate, it is sufficient to remember that
each one controls an entire Spetsnaz brigade: 1,300 professional cut-throats
continually in readiness to  penetrate the territory of  a  contiguous state
and go to the assistance of the agent-terrorists.
     One  can  best  imagine Soviet  military intelligence in the form of  a
powerful, feudal  state -  the  GRU  - with  a first-class  army. There  are
twenty-four lesser  satellite  states, the intelligence  directorates  (RU),
subordinated to the  head of this state, and  each of these  in its turn has
its  own  army,  and a strong one at that.  But each satellite also has  its
vassals each of whom has his own army and his own vassals, also with armies,
and  so  forth.  The  only  difference  as  regards  this  pyramid  form  of
subordination  is that Soviet military  intelligence does not operate on the
principle that 'the  vassal  of vassal is not my  vassal'. The GRU fully and
without delegating authority controls every step of the pyramid. These steps
need to be examined.
     Each  military district  and  group of forces consists ot armies.  Each
fleet  consists of flotillas which are equivalent to the armies  of the land
forces. On the staff of each army there is  an intelligence department  (RO)
which is in  effect a full vassal of  the superior  intelligence directorate
and  the  still superior  chief intelligence  directorate.  The intelligence
department (RO) of an army or flotilla does run an agent network of its own.
On the strength of each intelligence department, and there are in the Soviet
armed forces  at least  fifty, there  is  a  Spetsnaz company. This company,
which numbers 115 saboteurs  and cut-throats, is capable of penetrating into
the enemy's territory to murder and kidnap people, blow up bridges, electric
power  stations, dams, oil pipelines and so on. And these Spetsnaz units are
supplemented by the intelligence department's wide choice of electronic, air
and other types of intelligence.
     An army in the Soviet Union consists of from  four to six divisions. In
peace-time there are in the Soviet armed forces about 180 tank and motorised
divisions.  In  the  interests  of  simplification  we can  omit  the  eight
divisions  of  airborne  forces  (VDV),  the  brigades  of  marine  infantry
belonging  to the fleets  and still many  more branches of  the Soviet  Army
which  have  intelligence units  subordinated  directly  to  the GRU of  the
general staff.  On  the strength of the  staff  of each  division there is a
chief  reconnaissance  officer.  He has  his  own  troops,  a reconnaissance
battalion, and his vassals, the heads of regimental reconnaissance and their
troops. The reconnaissance battalion  of  each division, apart from tank and
electronic reconnaissance, has a sabotage company which is also staffed with
cut-throats  capable  of  successful operations in  the enemy's rear. In the
interests of accuracy  it is necessary to add that not  all of the  180 tank
and  motorised  rifle divisions have  a  full  complement  of  personnel  in
peace-time; many of them have a  complete technical  staff  and full officer
strength, but only a  partial complement of soldiers and NCOs. However, this
rule does not  apply to reconnaissance units. All the Spetsnaz  brigades and
companies  of  the  military  districts  and  armies, all the reconnaissance
battalions  (180)  of  the  divisions,  all  the  regimental  reconnaissance
companies (more than 700), are  always kept at full strength and staffed  by
elite officers and NCOs.
     Everything that we have  listed comes under the indivisible control  of
the GRU,  although  none of it is called  by this name. The  researcher  who
studies the GRU but does not take into consideration the  GRU's vassals will
have overlooked twenty-four separate espionage organisations,  each of which
is as powerful as the intelligence service  of one central European country.
He  will have  overlooked 100,000  elite troops possessing as many  fighting
vehicles as  a well-equipped Western European country. But  even that is not
all. In addition to its official vassals the GRU also has unofficial vassals
who  carry  out the orders of the GRU as precisely and  with as much jealous
zeal  as  do  the  intelligence  directorates  of  military  districts,  the
intelligence departments of armies and the chief  reconnaissance officers of
divisions and  regiments. These  are the military  intelligence services  of
Cuba, Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia,  Hungary, Bulgaria, Mongolia and
a number of other countries. These countries are satellites and in the  full
meaning of the word  vassals of the Soviet Union. Their secret police forces
are under the complete control of  the Soviet KGB and  take  the  form of  a
miniature copy of the KGB. Their armies are in thrall to the Soviet Army and
their military intelligence services are  full vassals of  the GRU, with all
their  agents, illegals,  military attaches, sabotage  agents,  diversionary
troops and so on. But of these later.

     Chapter Four
     The GRU and the Military Industrial Commission (VPK)
     When we use the term 'army' with regard to the Soviet Army we must have
in  mind  not only  the  Ministry of  Defence,  but  also  the twelve  other
ministries  whose  sole  function it  is  to  produce  weapons  and military
technology. Together all these  ministries  form  the  high-powered monolith
headed  by  the  military  industrial  commission  (VPK).  Included  in  the
collegium  of  the  military industrial  commission  are: one  of  the first
deputies  of the chairman of the council of ministers,  thirteen  ministers,
and  the chief of  the general staff and  the chief of the GRU. The military
industrial commission  is the Army  and the  Army is the military industrial
commission. When we talk  of  a struggle between the Army  and the Party and
the  KGB we  have in  mind  the  struggle  of the whole  military industrial
commission,  whose fortunes wax and wane in perfect harmony with the  Army's
own.
     The economic and financial might of the military industrial  commission
can  only  be  compared  with  the  might   of  the   Soviet  Union  itself.
Theoretically  the Soviet Union spends, in  the  interests of  defence,  the
improbably  small  sum  of nineteen billion roubles  a year.  This  nineteen
billion,  however,  is the  budget  of the  Ministry of  Defence  alone. The
budgets of the remaining twelve ministries which produce  armaments are kept
secret. The Soviet system is constructed in such  a way that the Ministry of
Defence  does not  buy;  it  receives  the armaments  necessary  to it.  For
example, an aircraft carrier is under construction  in the Soviet Union. The
Ministry of Defence does not bear any  of the cost of this. The price of the
ship is  paid to the  Ministry of  Shipbuilding by the Council  of Ministers
under the debit item shipbuilding  industry'. This Ministry, by the way, has
never  constructed  any  non-military  vessels.  Non-military  vessels  are,
without  exception, bought for  the  Soviet  Union in Poland, East  Germany,
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria,  Italy,  France,  Norway,  Sweden,  Denmark  -  it  is
difficult indeed  to  list  all  of  them.  It  is  probably true  that only
Switzerland  is an  exception  to  this  list.  The  same  thing is true  of
aircraft, tanks, rockets, nuclear bombs, military electronics, every item of
hardware. Nobody in the  Soviet Union  knows exactly how  much the  military
industrial commission swallows  up, but  in any  case  it is an astronomical
figure.
     At  the heart of any Soviet five-year plan  for  economic development -
not  the  propaganda  plan  which  appears  in all  the newspapers,  but the
genuine, secret  plan -  will be found the military  industrial commission's
plan. For all the other branches of the Soviet economy,  metallurgy, machine
tool  construction,  energy,  transport,  agriculture,  have no  independent
significance but only  provide for the activities of the military industrial
commission.  Soviet  science  is  another organ  providing for the  military
industrial  commission.  Officially it  is  allocated  about  sixty  billion
roubles  a year, three times more than  defence. But what sort of science is
it, if the Soviet Union can produce the first automatic satellite  destroyer
in the world but cannot  produce an ordinary compact, small-engined car? The
Soviet Union has had to  buy all its technology for the  production of small
cars from  Italy. What are Soviet scientists up to if  the Soviet  Union has
first-class  military  poisons but has to buy fertiliser technology from the
United States? What are  the  sixty  billion  roubles  spent on if the  USSR
constructs    gigantic   trans-norizontal   radar,   ultra-high    frequency
transmitters for  communications  with submarines whose underground  aerials
amount to thousands of kilometres in  length - but has to buy the technology
for the production of  ordinary household television sets from France? Sixty
billion  roubles  on science  is yet another  means  of  camouflaging Soviet
military  expenditure  and  the  true  might  of  the  military   industrial
commission.
     What has the GRU to do with this? The connection is this: the budget of
the  GRU is many times  greater than  the budget  of the KGB. But the KGB is
much bigger than the GRU, it has a vast apparatus within the country and its
political influence is colossal.  So why  is the financial might of the  GRU
many times greater than that of the KGB? (Some specialists consider it to be
several tens  of times greater.) The  business may be  explained as follows.
The KGB  has its budget,  which  is without doubt enormous, and the GRU also
has  a moderate budget. Both form a part of State expenses and naturally the
State  tries to limit these expenses. But in addition  to its 'clean' budget
the GRU has colossal orders from the military industrial commission and from
Soviet science which provides  for the military commission. These orders are
incalculably greater than the actual 'clean' budget of the GRU. For example,
on receiving an order from the  military industrial  commission  to steal  a
tank engine,  the GRU receives money allocated as a debit item to  'science'
or  'industry'.  With this  money the  GRU  will  recruit  an agent  without
spending  a single cent  of its own money, industry and science will receive
the engine they want and save enormous expense, and finally the GRU's 'free'
agent  will continue  to work  on  its behalf for  the rest of his life. All
twelve  ministries  of  the military  industrial  commission,  plus  all  of
military science, are ready to place money with the  GRU  if only  they  can
obtain the  technology which  is  essential  to them.  Designers and factory
directors receive medals and prizes for copying foreign samples of armaments
in the same way as they would if they worked out their own examples. The KGB
depends  only on its actual budget, but the GRU draws on the budget  of  all
Soviet  armament industries  and science.  In  the  course  of a  major  GRU
operation,  such as the theft of all the technological documentation for the
American nuclear submarine George Washington (which enabled the Soviet Union
to build a perfect copy -nicknamed 'Small George'), the GRU will not spend a
single dollar of its own  budget.  Other memorable examples were the copying
of the American missile 'Red Eye' and the  Anglo-French Concorde, among many
others.
<ul><a name=10></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     Why does the KGB not carry out orders for  the armaments industry? This
is very simple. The chairmen of the Council of Ministers  and  Gosplan  [The
State planning  committee] are responsible for the Soviet economy. They plan
how much money to allocate, to whom and for what purpose. To the chairman of
the Council of Ministers are subordinated  both  the armaments industry  and
the Minister of  Defence with  the general staff and the GRU. The KGB, alas,
is not  answerable to the chairman of the Council of Ministers. Having given
money to  the  GRU  to  obtain  something  interesting,  the chairman of the
Council of Ministers  or the chairman of the military  industrial commission
may  bang on the table and demand that delivery be speeded  up.  But if they
give money to the KGB then they will have to  wait quietly until  the KGB is
ready to deliver the goods. The  KGB is not usually in much of a hurry, even
when  it  has been  handsomely and generously  paid. The KGB is  a vain  and
arrogant  courtier,  having the right to  speak at  the King's  council, but
without  a sou in his pocket. The GRU is  an ugly hunchback: a  moneylender,
ready  to serve  anybody  and making millions in  the  process. The courtier
hates  the moneylender. The courtier would kill the moneylender  were it not
for the fact that he serves the King himself.

     Chapter Five
     But Why is Nothing Known about it?
     In the Soviet  Union the  registration  plates  of  certain  cars  from
Georgia end with the letters GRU. This amusing coincidence goes unnoticed by
almost everybody, including the police, for the GRU is unknown in the Soviet
Union  except to a small  circle of enlightened ones.  Even  in the  general
staff, of which the  GRU  is  a part, thousands of colonels simply  consider
that 'military department 44388', whence comes all espionage information, is
a branch  of  the  KGB. Moreover, KGB officers  who  guard Soviet  embassies
overseas but are not members  of the KGB intelligence organisation consider,
in many cases, that there is only one residency in the embassy,  that of the
KGB.
     Much is  known  about the  GRU by Western specialists, but the ordinary
Western man in  the  street has  practically  no idea at all about  it.  His
attitude is analogous to his attitude to the mythical animal from a Scottish
loch: either it exists, there have been photographs published of it, or then
again perhaps it does  not exist. Some believe, others do not, but decidedly
nobody is frightened of the animal. Nevertheless, how can so little be known
about  the  GRU,  given that  it certainly  exists  and certainly  possesses
colossal power?
     There are quite a few reasons, so  let us  discuss the  most  important
ones.  Firstly, having established their bloody dictatorship, the communists
had to announce to the people the existence of an  'extraordinary' organ  of
the  dictatorship of the proletariat which was permitted to deal in whatever
way it pleased with the people - including the  mass executions of millions.
They  did this through the mouth of Lenin when he  informed the people about
the birth of the V. Tcheka. Later Lenin's successors informed  people of all
the changes in  the  names of  the Organs, underlining that it  was only the
nomenclature that changed.  The essence remained as before. Traditions live,
and it is still forbidden to complain about the Organs. The GRU did not need
such publicity  and therefore  nothing  official was  given  out  about  its
existence. Secondly, the main function of the Organs is to exert pressure on
the people themselves. Consequently in the people's consciousness everything
that  is  dark,  underground and secret is connected with the KGB but not at
all  with the  GRU.  In  practical terms  the  GRU  did not take part in the
struggle against the people. Not  because  it was full of  humanity and love
for its fatherland,  but  simply because  nobody had given it this function.
Naturally  people  remember the  KGB (on any pretext),  but never  the  GRU.
Thirdly, in  his  struggle for power, Kruschev made known to a stunned world
some of the crimes  of his predecessors and honourable Tchekists. The effect
was so shattering that from that moment the whole world unreservedly saw the
leadership of the  KGB in  all spheres of secret criminal activity. Kruschev
by no means revealed everything, but only that which at a given moment might
bring him undoubted political capital. He pointed to the mass executions  in
Stalin's time but forgot to mention  the mass executions in Lenin's time. He
mentioned the  destruction of the communist leaders in 1937 but  omitted the
destruction  of the peasants  in 1930. He demonstrated the  role of the NKVD
but completely  forgot the  role of the communist party as the main, leading
and directing force. Kruschev was interested in showing up the crimes of the
Organs within the country and he did show up several of them. Revelations of
crimes  committed overseas did not enter into Kruschev's plans.  They  could
not  bring him  any political  advantage.  He was  therefore silent  in this
regard and  did not mention the  overseas  crimes of the KGB and, of course,
those of the  GRU. Fourthly, the struggles against dissent, emigration,  and
western radio  stations  broadcasting  to  the  Soviet  Union  are  the sole
responsibility  of  the KGB  but not the  GRU. Naturally  the most  talented
representatives of  liberation movements  and immigration address their best
efforts to enlightening  the  KGB itself. It  is  the  same as regards radio
station  broadcasting  to  the Soviet Union  and the Western organs of  mass
information in  general.  They certainly  devote  to the  KGB  significantly
greater attention. Fifthly, any unpleasant things which happen to foreigners
in the  Soviet Union are  first and foremost connected with the KGB and this
gives  rise to a  corresponding  flow of information  about the KGB. Lastly,
having made  rivers of blood from  the people, the KGB  strove  to whitewash
itself at all costs advertising the 'attainments' of the Tchekists. In  this
connection  all  intelligence  officers,  KGB  or GRU,  were categorised  as
Tchekists, and this  at a  time  when  GRU  intelligence  officers hated the
Tchekists many times more than they did the Gestapo. The GRU did  not object
to  this. It  preferred  to maintain  silence, not only about its crimes and
mistakes, but also about  its successes. The spying  breed  of animal  keeps
itself in the depths; muddy water  and darkness are more  to its liking than
publicity.

     Chapter Six
     The GRU and the 'Younger Brothers'
     The state structure  of any communist country strikingly resembles  the
structure of the  Soviet Union. Even if it finds itself in conflict with the
Soviet Union or has been able to  escape from its  influence, it is much the
same  in  character.  The cult of  personality  is a  general  rule  for all
communist  countries,  and any 'big  brother'  needs  an all-powerful secret
police  force  to preserve that  cult.  Then there  must  be another  secret
organisation to counter-balance the power of the first one.
     It is usually military intelligence which fulfils this counterbalancing
role, the more so since all  communist countries, regardless of  the kind of
communism they  adopt, are warlike and aggressive.  In a number of communist
countries  there would appear to be only one secret police organisation, but
in these cases closer inspection will clearly show a minimum of two mutually
hostile groupings. Sooner or later the dictator will be forced  to split his
secret service into two  parts. In  the  countries within  the  orbit of the
Soviet Union that separation  has already been carried out, for  all of them
have been created in the image of the elder brother.
     The  military  intelligence services of  the satellite  countries  show
great  activity  in  the  collection  of espionage material,  and  all  such
material  obtained  is  sent  directly  to  the GRU.  The  fact is  that the
intelligence services of the satellite countries are even legally answerable
to  the Ministry of Defence of the Soviet  Union. The military  intelligence
service  of  each  Warsaw  Pact country  is  subordinate to its chief of the
general  staff, but the  chief of  staff is in  his turn subordinate to  the
chief of staff of the  Warsaw Pact. Theoretically a general from any country
of the Warsaw Pact may be appointed  to this position. In practice of course
there have only ever been Soviet generals  appointed. One of them is already
well known to us: the former chief of the GRU, General Shtemyenko. After the
fall  of  Kruschev, Brezhnev,  trying  to  please  the  Army,  recalled  the
disgraced general from exile and reinstated  him as a full general. As chief
of  staff  of the Warsaw Pact,  his direct superior was  (and is)  the  High
Commander of the  United Armed Forces of the member-countries. To  this post
it has  always been a  Soviet  marshal  who has been appointed. First it was
Konyev,  then  Grechko,  after him  Yakubovski and  finally Kulikov. But the
official  title of  all these marshals  during  the  time they commanded the
united forces was 'First  Deputy of  the Minister of Defence of  the  USSR -
Commander-in-Chief of the United Armed Forces of the member countries of the
Warsaw  Pact'. In  other words, the armies are  the armies of several states
subordinated to a deputy minister  of defence in one of  those states. There
is  sovereignty for  you. The  USSR Minister of Defence, through his deputy,
directs all the forces of staffs of the 'fraternal countries', including, of
course,  the military intelligence services of those  countries, and  we are
not talking of close co-operation, but of  direct subordination in the legal
sense.
     This is  all very well,  some sceptics  will  object,  but  after  what
happened in 1939, every Pole had a fierce dislike for the Soviet communists,
and  their intelligence  services  would  hardly  work  their  best  in  the
interests of the GRU, would they? After 1953  the East  Germans fully shared
the feelings  of  the  Poles. In  1956 Hungary joined  them, and in 1968 the
Czechs  and Slovaks.  Surely the intelligence  services of  these  countries
would  not  work  hard  in the  interests  of Soviet military  intelligence?
Unfortunately this is a delusion which has gained too wide an acceptance. In
practice  everything contradicts  it.  It is a fact that the peoples  of all
countries in thrall to the Soviet Union hate the Soviet communists; but none
the less their intelligence services work to the full extent of their powers
in the  interests of the elder brother.  The solution to the riddle is this.
By means of harsh economic  treaties the Soviet Union has enchained  all its
'younger brothers'. For Soviet oil  and coal, electric  energy  and gas they
all have to pay very  heavily.  The Soviet Union proposes to its  satellites
that 'you may pay by means of your own wares or you may pay by providing the
secrets of other people'.  This alternative offer is a very tempting one, to
which the general secretaries have unanimously  responded  by ordering their
intelligence  officers  to  redouble  their  efforts.  So  the  intelligence
services  of  all  countries tied economically to the Soviet Union make  the
greatest possible efforts. By stealing Western secrets and transmitting them
to Soviet  military or  political intelligence they reduce  their countries'
indebtedness  and raise their  peoples' standards of living.  Western states
have been surprised by the extent of the intelligence interests of communist
states. Why should  Mongolian intelligence be interested in atomic reactors,
or  Cuban intelligence in  high-powered rocket engines? These questions  are
easily  answered  as soon  as one realises that  they  are  all part of  one
gigantic formation.  In the ranks  of officials of Soviet state institutions
overseas  it  is  almost  impossible  to find  one  'clean' one. All  Soviet
citizens,  from  ambassadors  to  cleaning  staff,  in one  way  or  another
co-operate with the  KGB or the GRU. The same thing is  true of the official
institutions  of the  'fraternal countries'.  There it is  also difficult to
find a single 'clean' official.  All of them are to some extent co-operating
with the Soviet  KGB or  GRU - even though frequently they themselves do not
realise it.

     Chapter Seven
     The GRU and the KGB
     The working methods of the GRU and the KGB are absolutely identical. It
is  impossible to  tell their  signatures apart. But their functions  differ
essentially  one from  the  other.  The  basic  function  of  the KGB may be
expressed  in one  guiding phrase, not to  allow the  collapse of the Soviet
Union  from  inside. Every specific function  stems from  this. To enumerate
some of those functions:  the protection of communist  VIPs; the suppression
of  any  clashes  or  dissent  among  the population;  the carrying  out  of
censorship and  disinformation;  the prohibition of any contact between  the
people and the outside world - including the isolation of foreign visitors -
and the cutting off of any contacts already established with  them; and  the
guarding of frontiers (there are ten  districts of KGB frontier forces). The
KGB also acts overseas but its activities rotate around the same main axis -
to prevent the collapse of the USSR from within. This task can be divided in
the  same way into its parts:  the  struggle  with emigration and efforts to
diminish  its  influence  on the  internal life  of  the Soviet  Union;  the
struggle with Western  radio  stations broadcasting to  the Soviet Union and
other  means  of  mass  information  which give  a  correct  picture of  the
situation  'within  the  state of workers and  peasants'; the  struggle with
religious  organisations  which   might  exert   influence   on  the  Soviet
population;  observing the 'fraternal'  communist  parties with the  aim  of
nipping in the bud any heresy which might emerge from them; the surveillance
of  all  Soviet  citizens  abroad, including  KGB  officers themselves;  the
seeking out and destruction of the most  active  opponents  of the communist
regime. The KGB also has other functions, but these are all either a part of
the main function or not of prime importance.
     The  function of the GRU may also be stated in one  parallel, but quite
different  phrase:  to  prevent  the  collapse  of  the Soviet Union from an
external blow. In the opinion of the general staff such a blow may be struck
at the  Soviet Union in peace-time,  even in the  course  of routine  Soviet
military adventures in  Asia,  Africa  or  Europe. This, the  most important
function of the GRU, is undertaken on  four  fronts. On the military  front,
literally everything  is of interest to the GRU.  Of  prime  importance,  of
course,  are the composition, quantity and deployment of the armed forces of
all  countries of  the  world;  the  plans  and  thinking  of  the  military
leadership  and  staffs;  mobilisation  plans in case of war;  the  type and
direction of military training of  forces; the organisation of  forces;  the
means  of  supply;  morale  and so on. Of prime  importance on the military-
political front  are the  relations between  the  different countries of the
world: overt and covert  disagreements;  possible changes  in  political and
military leadership of military and economic blocs; new alliances; any, even
the  slightest, change in the  political and military orientation of armies,
governments,  countries  and  whole  blocs and  alliances. On the  military-
technologica front the GRU handles intelligence  related to  the development
of new kinds of  armaments and  military  technique in  the countries  of  a
probable  enemy;  the  carrying  out of trials  and tests; new technological
processes  which   might   be   utilised   for   military   ends.   And  the
military-economic front presents exceptional interest for the GRU. First and
foremost it is fascinated by the capacity  of such and such a state or group
of states to produce modern types of weapons, but it is also  extremely keen
to  learn  about industrial  potential, energy,  transport, agriculture, the
presence of strategic reserves, vulnerable areas of economy, and energy. The
general  staff considers that  if the  GRU can give  accurate information in
good time from every country in the  world on these four fronts, then it can
count it  impossible to destroy the  Soviet Union  by  means of a blow  from
outside.
     In  many  instances   the  interests  of  the  KGB  and  the   GRU  are
diametrically  different.  For  example,  a  demonstration of  White Russian
emigres is  of  absolutely no interest  to  the GRU,  but  an object of  the
greatest possible interest to the KGB. And vice-versa: no military exercises
are of any interest to the KGB residents, but they are of great  interest to
GRU residents. Even  in those  fields where  the GRU and  the  KGB have what
would  seem  to  be  interests in  common,  for example  in  politics, their
approach to a particular  problem  would differ in essence. For example, the
personality of  President Carter  from the very beginning provoked almost no
interest  from  the  side  of the GRU, for on the most superficial  possible
examination of the  President's personality  the GRU infallibly decided that
he would  never be the first to carry  out a  pre-emptive strike against the
Soviet Union. But that same man, from the  point of view of the KGB, appears
to be  the  most  dangerous  opponent  possible,  because his  human  rights
policies are a  weapon which could destroy  the Soviet Union from within. In
another  case,  the GRU displayed  exceptional  interest  in the  changes of
personnel in the Chinese political and military leadership. For the KGB this
question posed practically no interest at all. The KGB very  well knows that
after sixty years  of communist power the Soviet population will  not be  in
the  least interested in  any communist  ideology  from  China  or  Korea or
Yugoslavia; it is also quite convinced that not one defector from the Soviet
Union will ever seek refuge in China. China is, for the KGB, almost an empty
place.
     In examining  mutual relations between  the GRU and the KGB we have  to
return to the question of the GRU's dependence on the KGB. In the chapter on
history we endeavoured to  show  the character of these  mutual relations in
the past. The  same mutual relations have been  preserved up to  the present
day.  The GRU  and the KGB are ready  at any  moment to destroy each  other.
Between them exist exactly  those  mutual relations which perfectly suit the
Party. The jealousy and mutual hatred between  the GRU and KGB  are familiar
to the police of every country where the Soviet Union has an embassy, and it
is precisely this  enmity, noticeable even to 'unarmed eyes', which provides
proof of the independence of the GRU.
     If the fate or career of a GRU resident were to depend even slightly on
his colleague from the KGB, he would never in his life dare to  differ with,
still less quarrel or brawl with, the  Tchekists:  he  would be like a cowed
lap-dog with his tail between his legs, not even daring to bark for the lady
of the house,  like  the  'clean'  diplomats  in all  Soviet  embassies. But
officers of  the  GRU  do  not  do  this.  They  have  guarantees  of  their
independence and invulnerability from the KGB. Some specialists are inclined
to  consider the GRU as  a branch of the KGB, usually adducing in defence of
this opinion  two arguments. Firstly,  they say that the chief of the GRU is
always a former KGB  general,  but  this has always been the case, beginning
with  Aralov, and has  never  prevented the  GRU from  actively opposing the
efforts of the KGB  to swallow it,  and even sometimes  on the order of  the
Party striking the Tchekists sudden and  heavy blows. The second argument is
that  everybody joining the GRU has to be  vetted by the KGB.  This argument
appears  convincing only at a  first  glance.  The  fact  is that  ea«jh new
official  of  the  Central Committee of  the Party also undergoes  the  same
vetting by the  KGB, but it certainly  does not follow this that the Central
Committee is under the control of the KGB or  is a  branch of the  KGB. Both
the Central Committee and the GRU select for themselves the people necessary
to them, and  in this connection consult  the KGB,  for any person until  he
becomes a Central Committee official or joins the  GRU is under the  control
of the KGB and possibly the  KGB may have some unfavourable information on a
given  person. The  KGB  in this case plays the part  of a filter. But  once
having passed this person through its filter the KGB no longer has the right
to interfere  with him,  either inside the  Central Committee or  inside the
GRU. The KGB is like a guard at the gate of a secret installation. The guard
may  refuse entry to an engineer who has forgotten his pass at home,  but he
has  no right  to  examine the  contents of that engineer's  safe. If it  so
desires, the KGB  may, of course, discredit any unwanted official of the GRU
or the Central Committee. However, this is fraught with potential reciprocal
measures.
     There exists still another irrefutable indicator of the independence of
the  GRU  from the  KGB.  In  the GRU there is no 'special  department'. The
security of the  GRU is assured by its own forces, and  always has been. The
Party is very keen that this should continue, because  it  knows that if the
KGB were to  organise its  own  'special  department' in  the GRU, a similar
department would swiftly be introduced into the Politburo.
     To illustrate the uneasy peace and the paradox of the independence that
exists within the  triangle of  Party  - KGB - GRU,  let us consider  a real
confrontation. The  working  day of the  GRU  chief  usually begins at seven
o'clock  in the morning, sometimes earlier. At that time he personally reads
all  telegrams  which  have  come  during  the  night  from  illegals,  from
undercover  residencies, and from the intelligence directorates  of military
districts,  groups of forces and of the fleet intelligence. In the next-door
office,  the first deputy to  the GRU chief and  the chief of information of
the GRU are doing the same  thing. If any questions have been raised by  any
of the higher commanders, from the chief of the general staff upwards, their
opinions will be heard separately, independent  from the opinions of the GRU
chief.
     This day began  for the GRU  leadership at the  unusually early hour of
3.30  in the  morning,  when it  was informed  by the command point that the
aircraft from Paris had landed at the central airport  and  taxied up to the
GRU  building. The day before, at Le  Bourget airport, the Soviet supersonic
passenger  aircraft Tupolev TU144  had  crashed.  The  whole  of  the  Paris
residency had been at the show  and the majority had  had  cine cameras. The
moment  of  catastrophe  had  been  photographed  from different  points  by
different officers,  and the  GRU had at its disposal no  fewer  then twenty
films showing the same moment. The films had not been developed in Paris but
brought straight to Moscow. Now the operational  technological  institute of
the GRU  would develop them immediately. At nine o'clock in  the morning the
Politburo  session was to  begin,  at which  they  would  hear evidence from
Tupolev, his  deputies, the minister of aviation production, the director of
the Voronesh aviation factory, directors of subsidiary concerns, test pilots
and of course the GRU and the KGB. But at seven,  the telephone rang and  it
was Andropov, at the time head of the KGB. 'Peter Ivanovitch, how are you?'
     Peter Ivanovitch Ivashutin (present chief of the GRU) did not hasten to
match the friendly tone. 'Well. How are you, comrade Andropov?'
     'Peter  Ivanovitch, don't be so  official. Have you forgotten  my name?
Peter Ivanovitch, there is something I want to talk to you about. I hear you
have got some films showing the catastrophe.' Peter Ivanovitch said nothing.
'Peter  Ivanovitch, would you be very kind and give me just one little film?
You know yourself that I  have to make a report to the Politburo but  I have
no  material. These  shows  are  not  of  great interest  to  my  chaps  and
unfortunately not one of them was there with  a cine camera. Help me to  get
out of this mess. I need that film about the catastrophe.'
     All service telephone  calls to the  GRU chief are  relayed through the
GRU  command  point. The duty shift of  operators is  always in readiness to
prompt their  chief  with a  necessary figure or fact, or to help him over a
mistake in conversation. At  this point the entire duty shift  was frozen to
the  spot.  Their  help  was not called  for  at all. The GRU chief remained
silent  for  some  time. The duty  operators  were quite certain that  in  a
similar situation, the KGB would undoubtedly refuse if the GRU asked for its
help. But what would be the decision of the GRU chief, an ex-colonel-general
of the KGB and ex-deputy chairman of the  KGB?  Finally,  in  friendly, even
tones he answered Andropov.
     'Yuri Vladimirovich,  I  won't give you one film,  I'll  give  you  all
twenty.  Only I will show them at nine o'clock in the Politburo,  and at ten
o'clock I'll send my chaps over to the Central Committee to give you all the
films.'
     Andropov  angrily  slammed down  the  receiver.  A  concerted  roar  of
laughter shook the walls  of  the  underground  command  point.  The  senior
operator, choking with laughter, entered the conversation in the log book.
     (After Andropov became  General Secretary  of  the Communist Party  and
Soviet  Leader,  Ivashutin still survived  as GRU chief, because any  attack
from Andropov  could  easily have upset the fragile Party-Army  balance with
unpredictable consequences for Andropov himself.)

     Chapter Eight
     The Centre
     Unlike  the KGB, the GRU does not try to advertise itself, and its head
office  does not rise  in  the centre of  the capital on  its  most  crowded
square. The head office of the GRU, although it is in Moscow, is by no means
easy to find. It  is enclosed from  three sides by  the central airport, the
old Khodinka field. The  aerodrome is surrounded on all sides by  restricted
buildings, among which are the  offices of three leading aviation  firms and
one rocket construction firm, and  the  military  aviation  academy and  the
aviation institute. In the centre of  these secret institutes  the aerodrome
carries on with its life as if half-asleep. Very, very rarely, in the middle
of the night, a covered-up fuselage of a fighter  aircraft is taken out of a
hangar, loaded onto a transport aeroplane and transported somewhere into the
trans-Volga steppe  for testing. Sometimes another transport aircraft lands,
goes up to the GRU building  and  unloads  a  foreign tank  or rocket, after
which  everything  becomes  peaceful  again.  For  two months  of  the  year
preparations are carried  out  for  the grandiose military  parades, and the
roar  of tank engines can  be heard on the airfield. The parades finish, but
the guarded  area  remains guarded, an empty field in  the centre of  Moscow
patrolled by watchdogs. Not  one  civil aircraft or helicopter disturbs  the
quiet of Khodinka, only the watchdogs howl at night like wolves. How many of
them are there? One  loses count. No, from three sides  it is impossible  to
get  to the GRU. From the fourth side, too. On the fourth side  there is the
Institute of  Cosmic  Biology, with more  dogs  and electric barbed wire.  A
narrow little lane leads through  a blind wall ten metres high, behind which
is  the 'Aquarium'. In order to penetrate into the inner fortress of the GRU
one must negotiate either the area  of  the secret aerodrome  or the area of
the top secret institute.
     The  head office of the GRU is a nine-storey extended rectangle. On all
sides the  building is surrounded by a two-storey structure, the windows  of
which give onto the central courtyard. The external walls have no windows at
all. The fifteen-storey  building adjacent to  the area also  belongs to the
GRU, although it is  situated  outside its external walls. Many  families of
GRU officers live here, and the building has a  completely normal appearance
and  looks like an ordinary  block of  flats. Only a certain  number of  the
flats, however, are used for  living  purposes; the others  are  used by the
service  for  official purposes.  The  whole  of  the  area,  centimetre  by
centimetre, is  under  surveillance  from  the  tele-cameras  and  patrolled
continuously by gentlemen with big, fat faces. But even if it were not thus,
a stranger there would be apprehended immediately. Any of the little old men
seated  on  benches  (minimum  twenty  years'  service  in  the  GRU)  would
immediately inform the necessary people if he saw something untoward. Nobody
is  allowed to  bring a car into the GRU's inner area, not even the Minister
of Defence or General Secretary. One is only  admitted after passing through
a special  inspection  and sophisticated  electronic equipment.  Nobody  may
bring in so much  as a cigarette lighter, still less a briefcase. There must
be  no metallic  object on  your person,  not even  a belt-buckle - the  GRU
recommends braces. All necessities for work and life are to be found inside,
including  cigarette lighters and  fountain pens.  The GRU gives  them out -
after they have been checked, of course.
<ul><a name=11></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     The chief  of the GRU is subordinate to the chief of  the general staff
and  is his deputy.  Directly subordinate to  the chief  of the  GRU are the
GRU's  command  point,  the  deputy chief  and  a  group  of  advisers.  The
organisational units constituting the GRU are  directorates, directions, and
sections. In units which are not directly concerned with the acquisition and
processing  of  information  there  exist  the  divisions  of  directorates,
departments and sections. The military rank of the chief of  the GRU is Army
General. Under him are  a first deputy and deputies. In the  case where  the
deputy has several directorates under his command, his military rank will be
colonel-general.  If he only has one directorate, lieutenant-general. Chiefs
of   directorates  are  lieutenant-generals.  The   deputies  of  heads   of
directorates, heads  of  directions and departments  are major-generals. The
deputy heads  of directions and departments, the heads of sections and their
deputies are colonels.  The rank-and-file  members  of  sections  are called
senior operational officers and operational officers. The military rank of a
senior   operational  officer  is  colonel,   of   an  operational   officer
lieutenant-colonel.
     An  overwhelming  number  of  GRU  officers hold the  military rank  of
colonel. This, however, does not  at  all mean  that they  are equal amongst
each  other. Between  the  colonel  who  fulfils  the  duties  of  a  senior
operational officer and the deputy head of a direction who is also a colonel
there is  a wide  gulf. The high service ranks  existing in the GRU  do  not
preclude the appointment of a very young captain or senior lieutenant to the
post of senior operational officer, either. The system adopted by the Soviet
Army permits this. A captain may be an acting major, or a senior  lieutenant
may be  an  acting colonel.  Seniority  is  judged  not by the  pips on  the
officer's shoulder, but by the position he holds.
     In total  the GRU  has sixteen directorates: most of them have a number
from one to twelve. Certain  numbers  do not  exist and the  directorate  is
simply  called  by  its  name, as  for  example the  personnel  directorate.
Directions and departments forming parts of a  directorate have numbers, for
example '41 Direction' means the first direction of  the fourth directorate.
Directions and departments  not  forming part of a directorate have a single
number with the letters GRU  added, for example, the  first  department GRU.
The  hierarchy  in the GRU is as follows. The chief of the GRU has one first
deputy and seven deputies beneath him. He controls:
     i The  Illegals  Section.  With the help of this section he  personally
directs effective  illegals  and agents  about  whom  nobody knows. He  also
directs his own first deputy.
     ii  First Deputy Chief of the GRU  (colonel-general), beneath  whom are
all the procurement organs which provide information.
     iii  The Chief of Information  (colonel-general) in charge of  all  the
processing organs of the GRU.
     iv The Chief of the Political Section (lieutenant-general).
     v The Chief of  the  Electronic  Intelligence  Directorate (lieutenant-
general).
     vi The Chief of Fleet Intelligence (vice-admiral).
     vii  The  Chief  of the  Cosmic  Intelligence  Directorate (lieutenant-
general).
     viii The Head of the Soviet Army Academy (colonel-general),
     ix The Head of the Personnel Directorate (lieutenant-general).

     Chapter Nine
     The Procurement Organs
     All  units  of  the  GRU   are  divided  in  their   designations  into
procurement, processing and support.  The  great majority of the procurement
organs, the providers  of  information,  are controlled by the  first deputy
chief of  the  GRU. They include  the  first  directorate, which carries out
agent intelligence on European territory,  and consists of five  directions,
each of which carries out agent intelligence on the territories  of  several
countries  (each direction  consists of  sections  which  direct  undercover
residencies in one  of the countries concerned); the second directorate with
an  analogous organisation carrying out agent  intelligence in America, both
North and South; the third directorate, which carries out agent intelligence
in Asia;  and  the  fourth directorate, dealing  with agent  intelligence in
Africa,   and  the  Middle  East.   Each  directorate  contains   about  300
high-ranking officers in  the Moscow centre, and about 300  abroad.  Besides
these four directorates, there are  also four directions which undertake the
same  duties.  These directions do  not form parts  of directorates  but are
answerable to  the first  deputy chief. The first GRU direction  carries out
agent  intelligence  in  the  Moscow  area   and  it   has  its  influential
representatives  in all  Soviet official  institutions  used by  the GRU  as
cover:  the Ministry  of Foreign Affairs, the  Ministry  of  External Trade,
Aeroflot,  the  Merchant Navy,  the Academy of  Sciences and so forth. These
representatives  fit  their  young  officers into  slots in the  institution
serving  as cover  and  guarantee  their  smooth  progress  in  their future
activities. In  addition some  GRU officers, on their return from  overseas,
continue to work in their  covering organisation and not in the head office.
Using   these  officers,  the  first  direction  recruits  foreign  military
attaches,  members of military  delegations, businessmen and representatives
of aviation and  steamship companies. The second direction carries out agent
intelligence in the area of East  and  West  Berlin, a gigantic organisation
which again  does  not form part of a directorate.  The  third  direction is
concerned with  agent  intelligence  in  national liberation  movements  and
terrorist   organisations.  Its  favourite  child  until  recently  was  the
Palestine  Liberation Organisation. The  fourth department carries out agent
intelligence work from Cuban territory against many countries, including the
United States. In many respects the fourth direction duplicates the activity
of the second directorate. It has unlimited power in the ranks of  the Cuban
intelligence service and with its help actively penetrates and endeavours to
direct the activities of unaligned movements.
     The GRU  adheres to a different principle  in running its illegals from
the principle adopted by the  KGB. Among  its procurement organs there is no
separate unit for directing illegals, and the GRU  does not  consider such a
unit necessary. Each of the  directorate heads and several of the  direction
heads have under  their command sections  of illegals.  This permits them to
run illegals and residencies under cover at the same time in the territories
of  groups of countries  or entire  continents. The directorate or direction
head may at any moment use his illegals for carrying out  a secret  check of
the undercover residencies.  The first deputy to  the chief  of the GRU also
has  an  analogous  section  under  his  command.  Naturally,  he  has  very
high-quality illegals. The first deputy may use  his own illegals for secret
checks on undercover residencies, and also the illegals under the command of
directorate and direction heads. Finally, the absolute cream of the illegals
are run personally by the chief of the GRU through his own illegals section.
He  can  use  his illegals for  the  checking of  everything and  everybody,
including illegals under the command of the first deputy.
     There  is  a  fifth  GRU  directorate, which  is  also  concerned  with
procurement  and  controlled by  the  first deputy.  However,  its functions
differ from those on the four directorates and four directions listed above.
The fifth directorate does not carry out independent agent intelligence work
but  directs the  activities of  the  intelligence directorates of  military
districts,  groups  of  forces  and  fleets.  This  directorate is a kind of
controller  of vassals.  Directly under its  control are twenty intelligence
directorates belonging to the military districts, groups of forces and fleet
intelligence, the latter having in  its turn  four  more  fleet intelligence
directorates beneath it. The number of secret agents and diversionary agents
ultimately controlled by the fifth directorate exceeds the number of all the
agents controlled by the first four  directorates  and four  directions, and
these  agents operate on all the same territories where illegals, undercover
residencies and agents  of the above-mentioned  directorates and departments
operate. With their help the first deputy, or indeed  the chief himself, may
secretly check on the activities of his directorate.  This arrangement works
in reverse too: with the  help of agents of  the first four directorates and
four directions he can check the activities of the secret agents of military
districts, fleets and groups of forces.
     In addition to the proliferation of units outlined above, there are two
more   GRU  directorates  which  are  concerned   with  the  procurement  of
information: the sixth directorate and the cosmic intelligence  directorate.
These  directorates procure and partly process information, but they do  not
go  in  for agent  intelligence,  so  they  are  not  considered  as  purely
procurement  directorates and are not subordinate to the  first deputy chief
of the GRU. The chiefs of both these directorates answer to the chief of the
GRU and are his deputies, but not first deputies.
     The GRU sixth directorate is  concerned with  electronic  intelligence.
For this purpose  its officers are  posted  to undercover residencies in the
capitals  of foreign  states  and  there form  groups  which  intercept  and
decipher transmissions on governmental and military networks. There are also
many regiments of electronic intelligence on the territories of the  Eastern
bloc  and  Soviet  Union,  and  these  are   integral  parts  of  the  sixth
directorate.   Furthermore,   this  directorate   controls  the   electronic
intelligence services of the military districts, groups of forces and fleets
which in their turn have  their own regiments,  special  ships, aircraft and
helicopters for electronic  espionage. The  electronic espionage services of
each military  district, group and  fleet  correspondingly  control  similar
services in the armies and flotillas, and  these in their turn control those
of  the divisions. And so it goes  on. All the information acquired from the
electronic  companies  of  divisions,   electronic   battalions  of  armies,
regiments  of military districts and  groups  of forces and spy ships of the
fleet, is collected in the sixth directorate and analysed there.
     The GRU cosmic intelligence directorate is no less powerful. It has its
own cosmodromes, a number  of research institutes, a co-ordinating  computer
centre  and huge  resources.  It works  out the  technical  details for  spy
satellites  independently  and  prepares them in its  own  works. The Soviet
Union  has  sent into orbit more  than  2,000 cosmic  objects for  different
purposes, and one in three of them belongs  to the GRU. The vast majority of
Soviet  cosmonauts,  with  the  exception  of   those  who  undertake   only
demonstration flights, work for half their time in space in the interests of
the GRU. The KGB lies far behind the GRU in this respect.

     Chapter Ten
     Fleet Intelligence
     The GRU fifth directorate  directs twenty intelligence  directorates of
military  districts  and  groups  of forces directly, and four  intelligence
directorates  of fleets co-ordinated  by  an  organisation  known  as  fleet
intelligence.  Fleet  intelligence  was  introduced  because  each  military
district  and  group  of  forces  has  a  very  strictly  denned  sphere  of
responsibility  in time of war, whereas  the ships of the four Soviet fleets
operate in widely scattered areas of the world's  oceans and each  ship must
continuously  have  full  information  on  the enemy.  The  chief  of  fleet
intelligence comes under the GRU chief as a deputy, and he controls the four
intelligence  directorates of  naval staff- Northern, Pacific, Black Sea and
Baltic-  and  the  fleet  cosmic  intelligence  directorate  and information
service. In his day-to-day  activities he  is  under the  orders of the  GRU
fifth directorate.
     Fleet intelligence directorates have a structure similar to that of the
directorates of  military districts. There are small  differences caused  by
maritime  factors,  which for our purposes are insignificant, and  the fleet
intelligence   directorates  together  with  those   belonging  to  military
districts  will be  examined in  detail in  Part II  under  the  heading  of
'Operational Intelligence'.
     The  GRU chief has at his  disposal two independent cosmic intelligence
services.  One  is   beneath  him  directly,  the  GRU  cosmic  intelligence
directorate, and the  other  through  the  chief of  fleet intelligence. The
Soviet High  Command quite  reasonably considers that, bearing  in  mind the
tasks  to  be  fulfilled, the fleet must  have its  own  cosmic intelligence
service. This  of course does not exclude the GRU chief  controlling his own
cosmic  intelligence  service with the  help  of  the  other and vice-versa.
Considering that not only the GRU cosmic intelligence service, but also that
of  the fleets has its own spy satellites,  we may say  that out of  all the
satellites  put into orbit  by  the Soviet Union, about half are directly or
indirectly subordinated to the GRU.

     Chapter Eleven
     The GRU Processing Organs
     The GRU processing  organs are sometimes called the information service
or  more frequently simply 'information'. The  chief of  information has the
rank of colonel-general and is a deputy to the GRU chief. The  following are
under his control:
     i  the information command  point; ii six information directorates; iii
the  institute  of  information;  iv  the   information  services  of  fleet
intelligence; v  the information  services  of intelligence  directorates of
military  districts  and  groups;  vi  all  the  organisations  of  military
intelligence listed below which are concerned  with the processing of secret
material acquired.
     The information command point is second only to the GRU central command
point.   It  receives  all  intelligence  material   coming  from  illegals,
undercover residencies, agents, from cosmic  and electronic intelligence and
also  from  the  intelligence  directorates  of military districts,  fleets,
groups of forces,  and  from  the  military  intelligence  services  of  the
satellite countries.  It has  full  power  to  ask  any  resident, agent  or
illegal,  in  fact  any source of  intelligence information,  to  give  more
precise  details or  to  re-  check  information  submitted. The information
command point works  without  breaks, without days off, without holidays. It
carries out all preliminary processing of all the  material submitted;  each
morning  at  six  o'clock it publishes  a top secret 'Intelligence  Summary'
destined for  members of the  Politburo and the higher military command, and
in  the morning all  material  which  has come  to hand  during the previous
twenty- four hours is transmitted to the informational  directorates  of the
GRU for detailed analysis.
     In  all, there are six directorates plus the  information  institute on
the strength of the information service. The numbering begins of course with
the seventh directorate which is  concerned with  a study of NATO in all its
aspects. The directorate consists of six departments, each of which consists
of sections. Each department and each section carries responsibility for the
study  of  individual trends  or  aspects  of NATO  activities.  The  eighth
directorate  carries  out  studies   of   individual  countries   worldwide,
irrespective of  whether  that  country  belongs  to  NATO or  not.  Special
attention is  paid  to  questions of political  structure,  armed forces and
economies, and special emphasis is put on a study of the personal activities
of statesmen  and military  leaders. The  ninth directorate studies military
technology. It is very tightly connected with  the Soviet design offices and
with  the armaments industry,  as  a whole. It is the  only link between the
Soviet armaments  factories copying  foreign  weapons and  the  residents of
Soviet  intelligence who obtain the necessary secrets. The tenth directorate
studies  military  economics  worldwide,  carefully  watching   arms  sales,
studying production and technological  developments, strategic resources and
vulnerable points. The idea of  an oil embargo first saw the light of day in
this directorate as a suggestion in the 'Locomotive Report' of 1954, when it
was pointed out that, to  wreck the  'locomotive  of capitalism' it was  not
necessary  to smash the engine, only to deprive it of a crucial  ingredient.
Immediately after this the  Soviet penetration  of the  Arab  nations began.
Happily  this stunning idea of the tenth directorate has not as yet been put
into practice. The eleventh studies strategic concepts and strategic nuclear
forces of all countries who possess  such capabilities, or may in the future
possess  them. This  directorate  carefully monitors any  signs of increased
activity, any change  in emphasis in  the activities  of  strategic  nuclear
forces in any region of the globe. The officers of this directorate form the
backbone  of Soviet delegations to the SALT talks. Unfortunately  we  do not
possess reliable information on the activities of the twelfth directorate.
     The  gigantic  information  institute functions  independently  of  the
directorates. It is  controlled  by the  chief of  information  but operates
outside the walls  of  the GRU. As opposed to  the directorates,  which base
their analyses of the  situation exclusively on secret documents obtained by
agent,  electronic and cosmic  intelligence,  the  institute  studies  overt
sources: the press, radio and television. The  Western press is  a veritable
treasure house for Soviet intelligence.
     The   activity  of  each  information  directorate  in   many  respects
duplicates the activity of its neighbour directorates. The advantage of such
a set-up is  that it prevents a one-sided view  and a subjective approach to
problems. Directorates and sections look  at problems in a narrow, parochial
manner, giving their opinions not on the whole question but only on  a part.
A unified opinion is worked out by the head  of information with the help of
his best  experts  and the  command point. Many reports from the procurement
organs of  the  GRU  are analysed  simultaneously by several or even by  all
units of the information at the same time. Let us suppose, for example, that
a case officer  belonging to an undercover residency receives a short verbal
report from an agent to the effect that a new jet fighter is in  the process
of being developed in the United States and no  official announcement has as
yet been made. Immediately after the meeting with the agent the case officer
would send an  enciphered telegram, one  brief  sentence, to Moscow. But the
information command  point has no  other report on this  question,  nor  any
evidence  to support it. The report would  be published in the 'Intelligence
Summary'  under the heading  'unchecked  and  unconfirmed report'.  The next
morning all  members  of the Politburo and the higher military command would
receive the volume printed  during the night. At the same  time all branches
of information would be studying the report. The seventh directorate, trying
to put itself in  the shoes of NATO  leaders,  would  endeavour to calculate
what present and future value this  fighter would have for NATO and,  if  it
were really to  be  taken into  service, how it would affect  the balance of
power in  Europe  and in  the world. The  question  of which  country of the
United States' allies would  be likely to buy such an aircraft would also be
studied. Units of  the seventh directorate would immediately start searching
their archives  for information  on what NATO leaders  have  said about  the
future  development  of  aviation.  Simultaneously   with  this  the  eighth
directorate responsible for individual countries  including US studies would
thoroughly  research  the  question as to  who  insisted  on the decision to
develop a new aircraft;  what forces in  the country  might come out against
such  a  decision;  which  aviation  companies  might   be  drawn  into  the
development of  the  aircraft by  tendering for  the contract; who  would be
likely to win  and who to lose. The ninth directorate, on the  basis  of  an
analysis  of  the  latest  American  achievements  in  the sphere  of engine
building,  aerodynamics, aviation electronics, might be able to foretell the
basic  technical parameters of  the aircraft.  The  tenth directorate  would
unerringly tell, on  the basis of  an  analysis of military orders, military
budgets and the  budgets of the country's main  corporations, which aviation
companies  would  actually be  involved  and to  what  extent. The  eleventh
directorate  would  study the  problem from  the  angle  of  the  aircraft's
potential  use as a carrier  of  nuclear weapons. It would  be able  to draw
conclusions without knowing very much  about the new aircraft, simply on the
evidence  of existing carriers  of  atomic  weapons,  their  replacement  in
service, the quantity of nuclear weapons and plans for their utilisation. At
the   same  time,  the  information  institute  would   call  up  all  overt
publications  which  might have some bearing on the problem and  present its
own opinion to  the information command point.  And all residents, illegals,
independently  operating   agents,  intelligence  directorates  of  military
districts,  fleets and  army groups  would  receive  appropriate  orders  to
increase  their activity  with regard to  the question. Such an order  would
also  be received by the 'younger brothers'.  By the evening reports of  all
the  branches  would be collected at  the command point  and be printed that
night  in  the  routine 'Intelligence  Summary', amongst hundreds of similar
reports already confirmed.
     The GRU lays great  stress on questions of training specialists for the
information  directorates. Alongside professional intelligence officers work
the  best  specialists  from  a  wide  range  of  scientific,  technical and
industrial  fields.  The GRU has the  right to  co-opt  any  specialist from
cosmic  research  or  atomic  energy, microbiology  or  computer technology,
strategic planning or international  relations. Such a right was accorded to
the GRU by the Central Committee on the principle that it  is better for the
Soviet Union to  be in  the know  about the  most modern achievements of the
United States,  Japan, Great Britain,  France  and the  Federal  Republic of
Germany than to work  out  its own. In conformity with  this the GRU, during
the most dramatic moments  of the space race of the sixties, unceremoniously
co-opted  the leading  Soviet  specialists in  the  field  of piloted cosmic
flights  and,  with  their  help, monitored  every  step  of  the Americans'
progress. It is evident that every Soviet programme was based on an American
model,  but launched days or even months  before  the Americans  carried out
theirs. As a result every record,  including  the first orbital  flight, the
first multi-seater spaceship,  the first  entry into outer space went to the
Soviet Union. This state of affairs continued right up to the time when  the
adventurism of the Soviet programme produced a series of tragic accidents.
     The  information directorates  of  the  GRU have at their  disposal the
highest quality  electronic equipment  produced by the best  American firms,
and  the  GRU  leadership, not without  reason, considers that the technical
equipment of the processing organs of the GRU is vastly superior  to that of
comparable  units within the  CIA - in spite  of the  fact that some Western
specialists have said that  the GRU information service is not as  effective
as it should be.  They base this on two facts:  that in 1941 the GRU had all
the  data on  the  forthcoming German invasion  but was  unable to  evaluate
correctly  the  information  it   had,  and  secondly,  that  much  of   the
intelligence material  was  reported  to the  higher  command  in  a  'grey'
unprocessed state. It  is impossible to deny either of these facts, although
one may complain that they belong to past  history and  not the present.  If
the GRU  information service is truly less effective than it should  be, the
answer  lies  in  the communist system itself.  General  Golikov did possess
detailed German  plans for the  invasion, but Stalin  was not  of a mind  to
believe them. Two years before, he had twice liquidated  the whole  staff of
Soviet military  intelligence from the chief of the  GRU downwards.  So what
more  was Golikov  to do?  Thirteen years later,  the new chief of the  GRU,
General Shtemyenko, found the  solution.  He  ordered the publication  of an
intelligence  summary each  night,  which  would include 'grey', unprocessed
information  and  unsubstantiated  data.  In this way  the  gallant  general
implied that 'this  is  not my opinion, it is the opinion  of my residents'.
The  GRU chief and the head of information would only give their own opinion
twenty-four hours later in the  next issue of the summary.  (This stroke  of
genius on the part of the GRU was immediately  adopted by the KGB too, which
in the  same way began to print 'grey' information each  night and save  its
judgements for the following day.)
     In a  totalitarian state, every lower level  is completely dependent on
its superior, and there is no organ which can defend it from the caprices of
its superior. This  is the very essence of the Soviet Union, and this is why
it is necessary for  the leaders of Soviet intelligence to have recourse  to
such cunning.  The  system has been well-tried up  to the  present time  and
serves as a kind  of lightning conductor.  The  chief of the GRU camouflages
his  own  opinion, always  adopting  the  position  adopted  by  the general
secretary of the Party at a given moment, and at the same time he is able to
present  the developing situation to the leadership in a most objective way,
thus transferring all responsibility from his shoulders to  the shoulders of
his  subordinates. The overseas  intelligence organs, separated by thousands
of  kilometres from Moscow,  cannot possibly know what opinion their  rulers
hold at a given  moment. They are  therefore forced to give simply objective
material which  can be directly reported to the higher command. Only in this
way  can the intelligence  leadership  exert any  influence  on its stubborn
masters  when  the  latter  do  not wish  to  listen  to  any  opinion which
contradicts their own.
     But the totalitarian system  still exerts a crushing influence  on  all
branches  of  society, including the intelligence  services.  Nobody has the
right to object to,  or contradict, the supreme command.  Thus it was  under
Lenin  and  Stalin  and Kruschev and  Brezhnev,  and thus it will be  in the
future. Should the supreme command have an incorrect view of things, then no
intelligence or information  service can convince it otherwise; it  does not
dare.  Nor  does first-class  American equipment  help,  nor  the  very best
specialists. It  is not  the fault of the intelligence  services, it  is the
system's  fault.  In cases where the supreme command is frankly deluded,  as
Stalin was in 1941, intelligence has absolutely no chance of influencing him
and its effectiveness at that moment is nil.
     However, it is not always like that. If the desires of the dictator and
his intelligence  service  coincide, then the latter's  effectiveness  grows
many times greater. In this case, the totalitarian system is not a brake but
an  accelerator. The dictator does not  care  at  all  for moral  sides of a
question. He is not at  all answerable before society  for his  actions;  he
fears no opposition or discussion; and he is able to supply his intelligence
service  with  any amount of money,  even  at a moment when the  country  is
suffering from hunger. The GRU has carried out its most brilliant operations
at  exactly  such  moments,  when  the  opinions  of  the  dictator and  the
intelligence service  coincided. And the information  service has  played  a
first-class role on these occasions.
     Let us consider one example. During the Second  World War a  section of
the tenth directorate (economics and strategic  resources) was studying  the
trends  in the  exchange  of  precious metals  in  the  United  States.  The
specialists were surprised  that  an unexpectedly large amount of silver was
allocated 'for scientific  research'. Never before,  either in America or in
any other country, had such a  large  amount  of silver  been spent for  the
needs of  research. There was a war going on and  the specialists reasonably
supposed  that the  research was  military. The GRU information analysed all
the fields of military research known to it, but not  one of  them  required
the  expenditure of so much silver. The  second reasonable assumption by the
GRU was that it was some  new field of research concerning the creation of a
new type of  weapon. Every information unit was brought to bear on the study
of this  strange phenomenon. Further analysis showed  that all  publications
dealing with atomic physics  had been suppressed  in  the  United States and
that all atomic scientists, fugitives from  occupied Europe, had at the same
time disappeared without trace from the scientific horizon. A week later the
GRU presented to  Stalin  a detailed  report on  developments in  the USA of
atomic weapons. It was a report which had been compiled on the basis of only
one unconfirmed  fact, but its contents  left no room  for  doubt about  the
correctness of the deductions it made. Stalin was delighted with the report:
the rest is well known.

     Chapter Twelve
     Support Services
     All  GRU organs which are not directly concerned with the  provision or
processing  of intelligence material are considered as support  services. It
is not possible for us to  examine all of these, but  we  will  simply  take
briefly the most important of them.
     The Political  Department is concerned  with the ideological monitoring
of  all  GRU  personnel. The  military  rank of  the head  of  the political
department is lieutenant-general and  again he is a deputy to the GRU chief.
As  opposed to any other  political departments the GRU political department
is made up not of party officials but of professional intelligence officers.
There are also several  other differences.  All  political  directorates and
departments of  the  Soviet Army are  subordinated  to the  chief  political
directorate of the Soviet Army, which is at the same time one of the Central
Committee   departments.   The  GRU   political   department,   however,  is
subordinated directly to the  Central Committee  administrative  department.
The  political  department  of the GRU  has  considerable  weight in Moscow,
especially as  regards staff movements, but it  has no right to interfere in
intelligence work. It exerts practically  no influence on the activities  of
overseas  branches  of  the  GRU.  Overseas  the  residents  are  personally
responsible for the ideological monitoring of their officers.
     The Personnel Directorate is directly beneath the chief of the GRU. The
head of the directorate, a lieutenant-general, is also a deputy to the chief
of the GRU. The directorate is staffed only by intelligence officers who, in
common with officers of the procurement and processing organs, the political
department  and other  branches of the GRU, regularly go abroad for a period
of several years and then return to work at domestic postings.
     The personnel directorate has exceptional influence both in the GRU and
outside. It directs the movements of all officers, not only inside  the GRU,
but  in  a  number  of  satellites,  in   fleet  intelligence,  intelligence
directorates of military districts and groups of forces too, and also in the
intelligence services of Eastern bloc countries.
     The Operational/Technical Directorate is concerned with the development
and production of all espionage equipment and apparatus. Within its dominion
fall several scientific research institutes and specialised undertakings. On
the orders of  the procurement organs the directorate prepares equipment for
secret  writing and  micro-photography, several  kinds of  dead  letter-box,
radio appliances, eavesdropping material, armaments and poisons, to name but
a  few. Its  head  is  a lieutenant-  general,  although  he  is not classed
officially as a deputy.
     The  Administrative/Technical  Directorate  is  in  charge  of  foreign
currencies and  other items of  value, gold  and diamonds, for example. This
directorate  is  the currency  middle-man  between  the  military industrial
commission and the operational users. It controls all the currency resources
of the  GRU and  also  carries  out secret  speculative  operations  on  the
international   market.   Possessed  of  colossal  currency   resources,  it
frequently  uses  them  in  order  to  exert secret  pressure  on individual
businessmen, statesmen  and sometimes even  on whole  governments.  No  less
important, it is responsible for  the growth of capital belonging to the GRU
and for the acquisition of 'clean' currency.
     The Communications Directorate deals with the organisation of radio and
other communication between the GRU and its overseas units. Needless to say,
it controls several powerful reception and transmission centres of its  own,
but should the need arise  to  secure special  channels of communication, in
case of a worsening of operational conditions, for example, then it can make
use of the services  of the  cosmic  intelligence directorate, communicating
with illegals and agents by means of GRU satellites.
     The   Financial   Department:   unlike   the   administrative/technical
directorate, the financial department deals only with Soviet money, not with
foreign  currency.  The  financial department  carries  out  legal financial
operations in the Soviet Union.
     The  First  GRU  Department  (Passport)  studies  passport  regulations
worldwide.  In  the  pursuit  of this  esoteric  duty  it  has the  greatest
collection in  the  world of passports,  identity cards,  driving  licences,
military documents, passes, police  documents, railway, air and sea tickets.
The department keeps maps of many thousands of frontier  posts, customs  and
police posts, and so on. The department can at any moment say what documents
are required at any given control point in the world, what sort of questions
are  asked,  and what  stamps  are to  be  put on  the  passports  and other
documents. Within a few hours, it  can  forge the passport of any country to
conform with the latest changes in the passport and visa regulations of that
country, having at its  disposal  hundreds  of thousands of blanks  for  new
passports,  identity cards  and  driving  licences  for every country in the
world. In my experience, the preparation  of the papers  which will preserve
one's true identity can be done in a very short time.
     The Eighth GRU  Department is  the most secret of  all  the top  secret
units of the GRU. The eighth  department possesses all the GRU's secrets. It
is  here that the enciphering  and deciphering of all incoming and  outgoing
documents is carried out.
     The Archives  Department  is possibly the most  interesting of all  the
departments.  In its cellars are millions of personal details  and files  on
illegals, domestic officers,  undercover residencies, successful recruitment
of foreigners (and unsuccessful  ones), material on everyone  from statesmen
and army heads to prostitutes and homosexuals and designers  of  rockets and
submarines. In  every file lies  the fate of  an individual,  in every  file
there is an unwritten novel.

<ul><a name=12></a><h2>PART TWO</h2></ul>
     Chapter One
     Illegals
     We  can define an  illegal  as  an  officer  of  strategic intelligence
performing the tasks of the  Centre on the territory of a foreign state, who
passes  himself off as a foreigner but not as a Soviet citizen. Illegals are
frequently confused with agents, but  these are completely different things.
The  crucial  difference  is  that  the agent is an inhabitant of a  foreign
country who  has been  recruited by,  and works in the interest  of,  Soviet
intelligence,  whereas an illegal  is first  and  foremost  a Soviet officer
passing himself off as a foreigner. Sometimes  some of the most valuable and
deserving agents receive Soviet citizenship  as an incentive and are awarded
the rank of an officer of the GRU or the KGB, but even so,  an agent remains
an  agent.  However,  in  the  occasional  case  when  a  foreigner has been
recruited  by Soviet intelligence and for  some reason or  other changes his
appearance or name and continues his  activities with false documents,  then
he is called an illegal agent.
     Both the GRU and the KGB have their own illegal networks, but these are
completely  independent  one  from the  other.  Each  organisation  selects,
trains, prepares, deploys and utilises  its illegals as it  sees fit. In the
same way each organisation separately works out principles, methods of  work
and  technical  details  of  the  illegal system  separately. The  system of
running illegals is entirely different in the two services. In the KGB there
is a special directorate of illegal activities. In the GRU, all illegals are
trained  in a  training centre under the leadership of Lieutenant-General V.
T.  Guryenko. After their training, the illegals are  put at the disposal of
the  heads  of  the  four   geographical  directorates  and  are  controlled
personally  by  them.  Thus each directorate  head  supervises a  number  of
directions and separately a group of  illegals. In  order  to help  him, the
directorate head  can call  on a small  group of advisers consisting in  the
main of  former illegals (though not 'blown'  ones) who  are  ready  at  any
moment, using false papers, to go to the target country and  'fine-tune' and
help the activities of  the illegal  networks.  Directorate heads themselves
frequently  travel abroad  for  the  same  reasons. A  number  of  the  more
important illegals are directly  controlled by the  first deputy head of the
GRU, and there is a cream who are under the personal supervision of the head
of the GRU. Thus both one and the other  have small groups consisting of the
most experienced  and  successful illegals who have returned from abroad and
who exercise supervision over the daily running of the illegals. If  a young
illegal begins  to acquire really interesting information he  is transferred
from the control of the head of a  directorate to  that of the first  deputy
or,  in  the case  of  even greater success,  to that of the head of the GRU
himself. This is, of course, a very  high honour, granted only  to those who
return  information   of  a  very  high  calibre  -unprecedented  or  highly
classified material which produces an  intelligence breakthrough. Equally an
illegal may be  demoted  for failing to produce  the goods. In certain cases
his  grade may  fall below  that  which  is  supervised  by  the  head of  a
directorate and he will be supervised only by the head  of a direction. This
is a very critical stage for the illegal, although he may not even  be  able
to guess that it  has happened. If he is  demoted to direction head  level -
and he is, of course, not informed about this -the next step could well be a
recall  to  the  Soviet Union, regarded by all intelligence personnel as the
direst  form of  punishment.  Recall  to the Soviet Union  is a particularly
effective  measure against any Soviet citizen serving  abroad. It is all the
same to them whether they are in Paris or in  Pnom Penh.  The only important
thing  is that they should not be in the Soviet  Union,  and transfer to the
Soviet Union, even on promotion, is regarded as the tragedy of a lifetime.
     The selection of potential illegals is  carried out by each of the four
geographical  directorates  independently. Candidates are  selected  on  the
basis of future requirements. In  basic terms,  officers  of the Soviet Army
and Navy are  used who as  yet  may  know nothing  about the GRU.  Sometimes
experienced officers of  the  GRU  are  used,  those who have  completed the
Military-Diplomatic Academy and have already  worked  in intelligence or  in
the information processing  departments.  Sometimes the GRU  will select for
illegal activities young Soviet citizens, mainly  those who  have  completed
linguistic  courses in  higher education.  Higher  education is an essential
requirement,  therefore  the minimum age at which a  recruit will  begin his
training is 21 to 23 years.
     Although  General  Guryenko's   organisation  is  called  the  Training
Centre', not one Soviet illegal  who  has defected has ever been able to say
exactly where  it is.  The name Training Centre seems simply  to reflect the
existence   of  one  organisation  occupied  with   one  task.   Either  the
organisation  is  constantly  on the move,  or a  secluded  little place  is
selected  for each individual trainee,  normally  in the Moscow  area  where
there are great numbers of dachas. The  dachas for  the training of illegals
are well  concealed among other governmental buildings, where outsiders  are
not to be seen on the  streets and  unnecessary questions are not asked, but
gentlemen  of sporting  appearance may be seen walking in pairs in the quiet
shady  avenues.  The  dacha  provides  an  ideally  isolated  territory  for
training. In  addition to  the  candidate  and  his  family,  two  or  three
instructors also live in the dacha where they can immerse him completely and
supervise him  very carefully all the time. His wife is also trained but the
children  lead normal  lives and  will  be held eventually as  hostages. The
internal  fittings of the  dacha are prepared very thoroughly and carefully.
From the  first day the candidate becomes accustomed to the circumstances in
which  he will be  living and working probably  for many long years. In this
connection he wears the clothes and shoes,  and eats the food,  even  smokes
cigarettes and uses razor blades procured from overseas. In each room a tape
recorder is installed  which  runs twenty-four  hours  a  day  while  he  is
occupying the dacha.  These tape recorders  continuously broadcast news from
the radio programmes  of  his  target  country.  From  the  first day of his
training he is supplied with  the majority of papers and magazines.  He sees
many films  and  descriptions on video tapes  of television broadcasts.  The
instructors,  for the most part former  illegals, read  the same  papers and
listen  to the same radio programmes and spend their time asking their pupil
the most  difficult questions imaginable with regard to what  has been read.
It is quite  obvious  that after a number of years  of  such  training,  the
future  illegal knows by heart  the composition  of every football team, the
hours of work of  every restaurant and nightclub, the weather forecasts  and
everything that  is  going on  in  the  realm of  gossip as well as  current
affairs, in a country where he has never been in his life. The instructional
programme is tailor-made for each trainee,  giving due consideration  to his
knowledge, character and  the tasks  which he will be called upon to perform
in the future. Attention is  obviously paid to the study of  the language of
the target country, to working methods and to a cover story.
     Often, the illegal's wife also undergoes training. She as  a rule works
as  the  radio operator. The posting of a husband and wife together, leaving
their  children behind as hostages,  is  a very  frequent occurrence.  It is
considered that maternal feelings are  much the stronger  and, with the wife
posted, hostages are that much  more  effective. Perhaps  more surprisingly,
the wife also acts as a  control for the GRU on her husband. She scrutinises
his behaviour and sometimes may warn the GRU about his excessive interest in
women or alcohol. On their return to the Soviet  Union, husband and wife are
subjected to a detailed individual debriefing on all aspects  of  their life
abroad. If  the husband and wife have decided to keep something  secret from
the GRU, their stories will eventually differ.
     After as much as three or four years of intensive training, the illegal
passes  a state commission  of  top GRU and Central Committee personnel, and
goes abroad. Usually his journey to the target country is effected through a
number of intermediary countries. For example, a journey to the USA would go
from the Soviet  Union to Hungary to Yugoslavia to Cyprus, Kuwait, Hong Kong
and Hawaii. At each stage, or most of them, he destroys documents with which
he has  entered  the  country  and goes on under new documentation which has
been prepared for him, either by other illegals or by the residencies  under
cover.  The illegal  will find  these documents  in a  reserved  hotel or  a
steamship cabin or in a letter through the post. At each stage he goes on to
another cover story, becoming another man. He  may have to live in one place
for some months and  study it so  he can use his knowledge of the country in
future cover stories. He does not stop over at all in some of the countries,
only using his visit to cover  his tracks. After  some  months he arrives at
the  country where  he is to  work. The first thing he does is  to visit the
city where he is supposed to have been born, gone to school, and married. He
gets a job and works for a time, after which he returns to the Soviet Union,
having finished  the second stage of his training - the illegal probationary
period abroad. This probationary period is divided as a rule into one or two
years, after which the third stage begins. On the basis of the experience he
has  gained,  and the shortcomings which have come to light in the training,
the  illegal and his instructors work out  a  programme of  training  for  a
period  which lasts another one or  two years. After this he again undergoes
state examinations, at which the head of the GRU or his first deputy have to
be present.  Then the  illegal is placed at the disposal of one of the heads
of directorates and again commences the operation for his roundabout journey
to  the   target  country.  For  operational   purposes   (though  not   for
instructional purposes) much use is made of Finland as a window to the West.
In the course of his  operational journey,  the illegal's stay in one of the
intermediate countries may  continue for several years. This  stage  goes by
the name of the  'intermediate legalisation'. To take the case of an illegal
whose target  destination  is Washington: he might  pretend to  be a refugee
from Hungary escaped  in  1956;  this  would mean  periods  of residence  in
Hungary to begin with, then Austria and Germany before he arrives finally in
America. An eventual French illegal would be likely  to make the journey via
Armenia and Lebanon. Both would consolidate their nationality every  step of
the  way. In  the  course  of the 'intermediate  legalisation', the  illegal
endeavours  to acquire as  many friends as possible, to go to  work, to  get
hold of genuine papers and  character and  work references.  At  the end  of
these years of preparation, he at last appears in the country where he is to
spend so many more years endeavouring to do it as much harm as possible.
     The minimum age of an illegal clearly cannot  be less than twenty-seven
to twenty-nine,  but usually he is older, on average about  forty.  This age
suits  the  GRU  very well for a  number of reasons. A  man  of forty has  a
balanced, conservative approach to life. The  stormy passions of  youth have
disappeared  and he  is  less  inclined  to  take ill-considered  decisions,
especially if he ever suffers the dilemma  of whether to continue working or
to  go to the police. His children are  sufficiently old to be able to  live
without their parents in the complete care of the GRU, but not old enough to
live  independently, and  so  they are ideal  hostages. And in the event  of
mobilisation in  the  target country,  he  may well be  able  to avoid being
called up for the army which would mean the breaking-off of relations and an
end to his active working life.
     On  his  arrival  at  his  objective,  the  illegal  sets  about  basic
legalisation. He has  been provided with good papers by  the best forgers of
the  GRU  on  genuine  blank  passports.  At  the same time  he is extremely
vulnerable if he is not  registered with the police  or the tax departments.
Any check may give him away and for this reason he endeavours to change jobs
and places of work often  to get his  name onto  as many company lists as he
can  and to acquire character  references  signed by real people. The  ideal
solution is for him  to obtain new documentation  from the police department
under some pretext or another. Often  he  will marry another agent (who  may
already be his wife); she will then be given a genuine passport, and he will
'lose' his  false one to have it  replaced with a real one on the production
of his wife's genuine document. The acquisition of a driving licence, credit
cards, membership documents of clubs and associations are a vital element in
'legalising' the status of an illegal.
     A vital role in the  lives of illegals is played  by  cover stories, in
other  words  concocted  life  stories. The basic  or ground  cover story is
created  on  the basis  of real events  in  the  life  of the  illegal, only
changing a few details. He keeps the date of his birth but of course changes
the place of his birth. The dates of birth of his  parents and relatives are
also accurately recorded, usually along with the professions of his parents,
dates of weddings and other details.  The illegal  is  thus  not telling  an
out-and-out lie but only  a half-truth.  He  will  not bat an eyelid when he
tells you that his father served all his life in the army. The only thing is
that he will not tell you in which army he served.
     There  is also the  emergency  cover story,  which is the last line  of
defence of  the  illegal on having been arrested by  the police. As its name
suggests, this  cover  story is only to be used  as a last  resort when  the
illegal perceives that the police no longer  believe his basic  cover story.
Designed to be  used only  when the  illegal is in the  hands  of the police
department, it is concocted  in  such a way that the details it gives should
be impossible to check. For example, one  illegal was arrested by the police
while he was trying  to obtain a  new driving licence  because a mistake had
been found in his old one.  He was subjected  to questioning, as a result of
which his basic cover story was found to be inaccurate. Then he went over to
his emergency cover  story  and  informed the police that  he was  a  Polish
criminal  who  had escaped from prison and bought  a passport on  the  black
market. During  this time the GRU, not having received from  the illegal his
routine  communications,  informed   the   Polish   authorities   about  the
'criminal'. The Poles published photographs of the criminal and applied to a
number of countries for his extradition.  However  strange it  may seem, the
police believed the story and handed him over to the Polish Consul. It would
have been easy to  break the emergency cover  story, if the  police had only
thought to  invite a  real Polish  immigrant for a  ten-minute chat with his
supposed fellow countryman. Of course he would not have known  more than ten
words  of  the language. But for the police it was sufficient that he  spoke
their language and did not object to being handed over to the Polish Consul.
     No less important  than the  cover  story is the cover  or the place of
work and  the type  of  employment which  the illegal  takes up in  his life
overseas.  Soviet  propaganda  paints  a grave picture  of  the intelligence
officer  playing the role of a colonel in  the enemy general staff. But this
is  pure disinformation. Such a  cover is unacceptable to an  illegal for  a
number   of   reasons.   Firstly,   he   must   keep   himself   away   from
counter-intelligence and the  police. He must  be a grey, inconspicuous 'man
in  the street' such  as millions would  hurry past  without  noticing.  Any
officer on  any  Western  general  staff  is  continuously  under  scrutiny.
Secondly,  he must  be professional in  his field. In  the  general staff he
would  be  exposed  almost  immediately.  Thirdly,  for  such  a  cover  his
legalisation would have to be unacceptably protracted. He would certainly be
asked about  the military schools and academies where he is supposed to have
been, the regiments in which he has served, and his acquaintances  among the
officers  and  staff.  Fourthly,  an  illegal  needs  plenty   of  time  and
opportunity to  meet whoever he wants to meet.  If a colonel on  the general
staff  consorted   with   prostitutes,  homosexuals,   stockbrokers,  atomic
submarine workers and bootblacks - all those multifarious people he needs to
cultivate  - he  would be  exposed  within  forty-eight  hours. Finally, and
perhaps  most importantly,  the requirements  of  the GRU change with  great
rapidity. Today they are interested in documents from  a certain  department
of the general staff  and tomorrow  from another. But our illegal is working
in yet another department and all his attempts to  have talks with  officers
of  the  first  two departments  have  been met with  a blank  wall or  cold
suspicion. No, the kind of cover offered by such a role is neither  feasible
nor a great deal of use.
     Much better for him to be an independent journalist like Richard Sorge,
or an independent artist like Rudolph Abel, coming and going as he  pleases.
Today he  is talking with the Prime Minister, tomorrow with prostitutes, the
next day with professional killers and then with atomic  weapon workers.  If
he  doesn't want to work for  three months, there is  no problem. If he gets
many thousands of dollars through the post, again no problem. It  is part of
his cover. There are  better, of  course.  A  garage owner,  for example. He
hires his staff and himself goes wherever he wants and  for  as long  as  he
wants, or  he  stands at the window and takes the money. Thousands of people
pass  him  every day -ballerinas and  artists, senators and scientists - and
colonels of  the  general staff.  To one  he  gives  money and  instructions
written in  secret writing,  from another he receives reports. For the basic
task of the  illegal is  not  himself to  penetrate  secret targets,  but to
recruit agents for this purpose. This is his raison d'etre.
<ul><a name=13></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     An illegal  residency  is  an  intelligence  organisation comprising  a
minimum of two illegals, usually the resident and a wireless operator, and a
small number of agents (at least one) working for them. We already know that
illegals  themselves,  without  agents, are not  able  to  obtain  anything.
Gradually, as a result of recruiting new agents, the residency  may increase
in size.  More illegals may  be sent out  to the resident, one  of whom  may
become his assistant. The GRU considers it counter- productive to have large
residencies.  Five  illegals  and eight  to ten  agents  are  considered the
maximum, but  usually the residencies are much smaller  than  this. In cases
where the recruitment of new agents has gone well  the GRU prudently divides
the  residency  in  two  parts. Thereafter  any  contact between the two new
residencies is of course  forbidden, »o that if one  residency is discovered
the other does not suffer.

     Chapter Two
     The Undercover Residency
     The undercover residency  is one  of  the  basic forms of  intelligence
set-up  for the GRU  abroad.  (It  should be  remembered that the undercover
residency and the  illegal  residency are completely  separate entities.) In
every country  where  official  Soviet representation exists there  is a GRU
undercover residency. It exists  in parallel with, and is analogous to,  the
KGB  undercover residency.  Thus every overseas Soviet colony  is  invisibly
divided  into  three organisations:  the 'clean  ones',  that is the genuine
diplomats  and  correspondents,  and the representatives of external  trade,
civil airlines, the merchant navy, and Intourist, headed  by the ambassador;
the  undercover  residency of  the  GRU; and the undercover residency of the
KGB.
     Very often, the 'clean' personnel  make no  distinction between the KGB
and the GRU and call them both dirty,  'savages', 'Vikings' or 'neighbours'.
The  more  enlightened staff,  like for example the  ambassador, his  senior
diplomats  and the more observant people, understand the  difference between
the  two organisations,  dividing them up as close neighbours (the KGB), who
continually meddle in the  day-to-day affairs of each person in  the colony,
and  distant  neighbours who  take  absolutely  no interest  at  all in  the
day-to-day life of the Soviet colony (the GRU).
     For the GRU undercover residency lives a secluded and isolated life. It
contains   significantly   fewer   employees  than   either  of  the   other
organisations.  Normally in Soviet colonies up  to 40 per cent of the people
may be considered in the 'clean' category. (This  of course does not prevent
the majority of them, to a greater or lesser extent, from co- operation with
both the KGB and the GRU; but they are not to  be considered as professional
intelligence  officers.) Up to 40 or 45 per cent are officers of the KGB and
only 15 to 20 per cent, in rare cases up to 25 per cent, are officers of the
GRU. This does not  however mean that the intelligence potential  of the GRU
apparatus is less than that of the KGB. The larger part of the KGB personnel
is  occupied  with questions  of  security, that is with  the  collection of
compromising  material  on  Soviet  people,  'clean'  people  including  the
ambassador,  and their  own colleagues  in  the KGB  who have  contact  with
foreigners and frequently with officers of the GRU. Only a small proportion,
in optimum cases half of the  KGB personnel, are working against foreigners.
The GRU, on the other hand, directs its entire potential against foreigners.
When one adds to  this the  unequalled financial power of the GRU, vastly in
excess  of  that of the  KGB, it  becomes  clear  why the  most  outstanding
operations of  Soviet intelligence have been mounted  not by the  KGB but by
the GRU.
     The minimum number  of staff for any GRU undercover  residency is two —
the resident and a combined radio/cipher officer. Such a theoretical minimum
exists also for the other organisations, the KGB and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. Theoretically the Soviet colony in a very small country may consist
of six  people,  three of  whom,  the  ambassador  and  two  residents,  are
diplomats, and the other  three  radio/cipher  officers. Each of  the  three
branches of the Soviet colony has its own enciphering machine and completely
independent  channel of communication with Moscow. Equally, each has its own
boss  in Moscow—the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the chairman  of the KGB or
the head  of the GRU. Supreme  arbitration between them can only  be carried
out in  the Central Committee, which in its turn has an  interest in fanning
the flames of discord between the three organisations. The Central Committee
has the right  to  recall any  ambassador or resident and this  same Central
Committee has to decide questions as to which slots, and how many, should be
accorded to each of the  three organisations.  This is  a difficult task, as
the Committee must  not  offend  the KGB on  questions of  security,  on the
shadowing of  its own  diplomats above all,  nor must it offend the GRU, for
without the acquisition of data on present-day technology the quality of the
Soviet  Army would  remain static.  Finally  it must not  offend  the 'clean
ones'. They also must have a sufficient complement to serve  as a screen for
the dark activities of the two residencies.
     This is why Soviet embassies,  consulates, trade representations and so
on grow  and  multiply  and  swell. As  the residency  grows,  the  resident
acquires several deputies in place of the one he had at first. The number of
radio/cipher officers increases. A technical services group is organised, an
operational  group,  a  tech-ops group,  a radio  monitoring station  on the
networks of  the police and  counter-intelligence. The number of operational
officers engaged directly in recruiting and running agents increases. In the
very biggest residencies of the GRU, such as that in New York,  there may be
from seventy to eighty officers. Medium-sized residencies  like that in Rome
would  contain between thirty and  forty officers. All officers on the staff
of a  residency  are  divided  into three  categories  - operational  staff,
technical-operational staff and technical staff. The operational  staff  are
those  officers  who are directly  concerned  with  recruiting  and  running
agents. In the operational  staff are  included  residents, deputy residents
and operational  officers.  To the technical- operations staff belong  those
officers who  are directly concerned with and responsible for the production
of intelligence, but who do not have personal contact with agents, nor often
with foreigners  at  all. These  are radio/cipher  officers, officers of the
technical services and operational technical  services and  the operators of
the radio monitoring post.  To the technical staff belong chauffeurs, guards
and accountants.
     The Resident
     He is  the senior  representative of the GRU  in any  given  place, and
answerable only to the head of the GRU  and the Central Committee. He is the
boss of  all GRU officers and has the right to send  any of them,  including
his own deputies, out of the country immediately. In this case  he does  not
even have to justify his decision, even in front of  the head of the GRU and
the Central Committee. The resident is completely  responsible for security,
both  as  regards the work of  each of his individual officers and recruited
agents,  and the security  of the  residency as a  whole. He is chosen  from
among  the most experienced officers and as a  rule  must  have a minimum of
three to five years of  successful work  as an operational officer and three
to five years as the deputy resident before his appointment. A resident in a
large residency will hold the military rank of  major-general, in medium and
small   residencies   that   of  colonel.   This  does  not   mean   that  a
lieutenant-colonel cannot be appointed resident, but  then, according to the
GRU system, he will be paid a full colonel's  or major-general's salary and,
if  he  copes  successfully, will have  to fill posts commensurate with  the
higher rank. He  is  not afterwards permitted to return to a post ordinarily
filled by a lieutenant-colonel.
     The deputy  resident serves as the resident's assistant and assumes his
responsibilities when he is absent. He undertakes the duties given to him by
the  resident  and  carries on recruiting work in the same way  as all other
operational  officers. Frequently a  deputy resident heads teams of officers
working in one  or another specialised field. Sometimes the resident himself
supervises   the  most  experienced  operational  officers  and  the  deputy
residents  the  younger,  less experienced  officers.  In  some  very  large
residencies, and also sometimes where there is great activity on the part of
GRU illegals,  there  is  a post  called deputy resident for  illegals.  The
undercover residency and  the  illegal residency are completely separate and
the undercover residency has no idea  how many  illegals there are, or where
or  how they  work. At the  same time, on instructions  from the Centre, the
undercover  residency continually gives them help and support, placing money
and passports in  dead-letter boxes,  emptying dead-letter boxes  for  them,
studying conditions and clarifying  certain important questions.  Very often
the undercover residency is used to rescue illegals.
     The military rank of any deputy resident is full  colonel. At  the same
time the same rules apply as apply to residents. The deputy resident may  be
a  lieutenant-colonel or even a major; however, from the  administrative and
financial points of view he is a full colonel with full rights.
     The Operational Officer
     This  is a GRU officer who carries  out the recruitment of agents, runs
them and through them receives  or acquires the secret documents and samples
of  weaponry  and  military technology.  Every operational  officer from the
moment of his  arrival in the country is obliged to recruit a minimum of one
agent, as well  as often having to take charge  of one  or two other  secret
agents who have previously been recruited by his predecessors. He  must keep
these agents and increase their productivity. An identical burden  is placed
on the deputy resident at the same  time as he is fulfilling the obligations
of  a  deputy.  This  system  is  applied  in   all  small  residencies.  In
medium-sized residencies, the resident himself may take a direct interest in
recruitment or not as he wishes. The residents of very large residencies are
exempted from personal recruitment.
     Alongside his recruitment work, the operational officer carries on with
the acquisition of intelligence material by all possible means. He converses
with  foreigners, travels around  the country and reads  the  press  avidly.
However, the  GRU's  over-riding view is  that  recruitment work is the most
important part of an officer's duty, and it calls it number one (in addition
to  certain  other colloquial  words).  All  other  work-  support  and  the
performing of operations  for others,  however important- is  known as zero.
One may be added to zero  if a 'zero' agent  manages to recruit a foreigner,
in which case he becomes a '10', which is clearly the best number to be. For
this reason  an operational officer who has been abroad for three years  and
not recruited a single agent, even if he has achieved outstanding success in
collecting the  most interesting intelligence  material, is considered to be
idle. According to the standards  of  the GRU,  he  has sat  for three years
doing  absolutely  nothing  and  therefore  hardly merits consideration  for
another overseas posting.
     The  military rank  of an operational officer is lieutenant-colonel  or
colonel but in  practice he may be  a major (as I was) or captain, or even a
senior lieutenant. If he  is successful in his  recruitment work he stays on
at  this level receiving automatic promotion according to the length of time
served. If  he does not manage  to recruit any agents, he is deprived of all
his  colonel's privileges and again becomes an ordinary senior lieutenant or
captain and has to compete for promotion  in the ordinary  way, as automatic
promotion is not granted to unsuccessful officers.
     The  military ranks prescribed  for  undercover  residencies  are  also
applicable  for  illegal residencies,  with  the  sole difference  that  the
illegal resident  may be a major-general having many fewer people  under his
command than the resident of the undercover residency.
     The Radio/Cipher Officer
     Although  he  is  an  officer  of technical  operational staff, and his
military rank is  not usually higher than  that of major, the  radio/ cipher
officer is the second most important person in the residency. He is not only
responsible for cipher matters, the  storage  and use of ciphers  and cipher
machines, but  also for the transmission  and reception of enciphered cables
and  the  storage  of  all  secret  documentation  in   the  residency.  The
radio/cipher officer possesses all the secrets of the residency and since he
deciphers communications from Moscow he knows the news even earlier than the
resident. Nobody, including the ambassador and the KGB resident, at any time
or under any pretext has  the right of access to his room. They do not  even
have  the right to  know the number and types  of  cipher machines installed
there.  These  restrictions also apply to GRU deputy  residents. Even during
periods when the  resident is away and the deputy resident is acting for him
he does not have the right to go into the radio/cipher operator's room or to
ask  him any  specific questions which have a bearing on his work.  Only the
resident may exercise  any control over the cipher officer,  and he pays for
the privilege because  the cipher officer is the  only man in  the residency
who  is entitled  to  communicate  with Moscow without the knowledge of  the
resident.  He  can send  a cable containing  an  adverse  report  about  the
resident of which the resident himself will know nothing. It is  the duty of
the  cipher  officer to  exercise  silent watch over  the behaviour  of  the
resident,  and if  there is  any shortcoming  he  must  report it.  In small
residencies, where there is only one radio/cipher officer, only the resident
may replace him should he become incapacitated for  any reason. If both  the
resident and the cipher officer should become incapacitated at the same time
then  the deputy resident and the whole residency will remain completely cut
off from  the Centre. Naturally the  ambassador's and the  KGB's channels of
communication can be  used, but only in order  to  inform the  GRU in a very
general  way. It  is natural  therefore that great care is  taken of  cipher
officers  (this is just  as true of  the KGB  as the GRU). Draconian  living
conditions are imposed on all cipher officers. They are only allowed to live
in official  Soviet embassy accommodation guarded  around the clock. Neither
the cipher  officer  nor his wife is allowed to leave the guarded  territory
independently or unaccompanied. They are at  all times led by an officer who
enjoys diplomatic immunity. Neither the officer nor his wife is allowed near
places where  foreigners  are  to  be  found. Even  if these foreigners  are
Bulgarians  or Mongolians and are on guarded territory belonging to a Soviet
embassy, the restriction remains in force. The cipher officer is not allowed
in the same room  with them even though he may  be silent and in the company
of  his resident. He and his family  must have a  diplomatic escort on their
journey  out from the  Soviet Union and on  their return. During the time of
his assignment abroad,  he  is forbidden  all  leave. It is easy to see  why
cipher officers are not posted abroad for longer than two years.
     Of course those cipher officers  who  have  served their whole lives on
the territory  of  the Soviet Union deeply envy those  who have had postings
abroad,  no  matter where;  and  those who have been abroad will give  their
right  arms  to  get another  posting abroad,  no matter  where  - Calcutta,
Shanghai  or  Beirut. They will agree to  any  conditions, any climate,  any
restrictions on their family lives, for they have learnt with their mother's
milk the rule that overseas life is always better than in the Soviet Union.
     Technical Services (TS) Officer
     They are concerned with  electronic intelligence  from  the premises of
official  Soviet premises,  embassies, consulates, and  so on. Basic targets
are the telecommunications apparatus  of the government, diplomatic wireless
communications,  and military channels of communication. By monitoring radio
transmissions, secret and cipher, technical services groups  not only obtain
interesting  information  but  also  cover   the   system   of  governmental
communications, subordination of  the different components of the  state and
the military structure.
     The  military  ranks  of technical  services  officers  are  major  and
lieutenant- colonel.
     Radio Monitoring Station Officers
     In  contradistinction   to  TS  officers,  these   are  concerned  with
monitoring  the radio  networks  of the  police and security  services.  The
technical  services and  the  radio  monitoring station  are  two  different
groups,  independent  of each other, both  controlled  by the  resident. The
difference between them is that the technical services work in the interests
of  the Centre, trying to obtain state  secrets, but the  monitoring station
works only in the interests  of the residency trying  to determine where  in
the city police activity is at its highest at a given moment  and thus where
operations may be mounted  and where they should not  be mounted. Groups for
the study of operational conditions are made up of  the most junior officers
who  will  eventually  become  operational  officers  arid  be sent  out  on
independent  recruitment work.  These are small groups who continually study
the local press  and police activities, endeavouring to obtain by  means  of
isolated snippets  a general picture of the  police work in a given city and
country.  Besides their scanning of police reports for an ultimate overview,
they also  minutely  study and  analyse, for example, the  numbers of police
vehicles  which  appear  in newspaper pictures or  the  surnames  of  police
officers and detectives.  Sometimes this  painstaking work brings unexpected
results. In  one country a keen journalist on  a  small newspaper reported a
police plan to install secret television cameras in order to survey the most
highly populated  parts of the city; this was  enough for the  GRU to become
interested  and to  take  corresponding  measures.  Within  a month the  GRU
resident  was  able to say with conviction  that he was fully  informed with
regard to the police system of control by  television  and this  enabled the
whole residency successfully to avoid traps laid for them for several years.
The  military ranks  of officers of these  groups are senior  lieutenant and
captain.
     The Operationa] Technical Group
     This  is concerned  with  the  repair  and  maintenance of photographic
apparatus, photocopying equipment and the like. At the disposal of the group
there are  dead-letter boxes of all  types,  radio transmission stations, SW
(secret  writing)  materials, microphoto-graphy  and  micropantography.  The
officers of this group are always on hand to give the necessary explanations
to  operational officers and to instruct  them  on  the use  of this or that
instrument  or  method.  These  officers   continually  monitor   television
programmes and collect useful items on video tape, giving to Moscow material
it could not get from  any other source. The officers of the group, together
with the  officers of the group for the study of operational conditions, are
widely  used  for  the  security  of agent  operations,  the carrying out of
counter-surveillance, signals  organisation, dead-letter box  operations and
so on.
     Technical Personnel
     Only the very  largest residencies contain technical personnel. Drivers
are only  allocated to residents who hold the rank of general. However, many
generals,  in an  effort  to  be  indistinguishable  from  other  diplomats,
dispense with the services of  drivers. The military  rank of a driver is an
ensign.  However, sometimes  an operational  officer  is to be found in  the
guise of a driver and he, of  course, has  a much  superior rank.  This is a
widespread method of deception, for who would pay attention to a driver?
     Some  residencies,  especially those in countries where attacks  on the
embassy cannot  be excluded,  have a staff of guards besides the KGB  guards
who are  responsible for  the external  protection  of the building. The GRU
internal security guards consist of young Spetsnaz officers  in the rank  of
lieutenant  or senior  lieutenant.  The  internal  security  guards  of  the
residency may be deployed at the request of  the resident in countries where
KGB attempts to penetrate  the  GRU  get out of  hand. The internal security
guards answer  directly to the resident or his deputy. Naturally they do not
take part in agent handling operations.
     An  accountant,  in the rank  of captain or major, is employed only  in
those  residencies where  the  normal  monthly  budget  exceeds  one million
dollars. In other cases the financial affairs  are the concern of one of the
deputy residents.
<ul><a name=14></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     In our examination of  the undercover residency, we  have naturally  to
examine  its  cover, the official  duties used by KGB  and  GRU  officers to
camouflage their secret activities. Without exaggeration it may be said that
any  official  duty  given  to  Soviet  citizens abroad may be  used to mask
officers of  intelligence organisations: as ambassadors and drivers, consuls
and  guards,  dancers,  writers,   artists,  simple  tourists,  guides   and
stewardesses, heads of  delegations and  simple section  heads, UN employees
and priests, intelligence officers conceal their  true functions. Any person
who has the right of official entry and exit from  the  Soviet Union may  be
used for intelligence tasks, and the vast majority of these are in fact only
occupied  in   intelligence  work.   Some  types  of  cover  provide  better
possibilities,  some worse. Some are used more by  the GRU, some more by the
KGB. Let us look at the basic ones.
     The  embassy  is used to an equal extent by  both  organisations.  Both
residents  and  their  deputies  are in  possession  of  massive amounts  of
information which would expose them to an un-acceptably high risk of arrest.
For this reason the KGB resident and his colleague from the GRU, and usually
their  deputies too, are bearers of diplomatic passports, that is, they work
officially  in the  embassies.  Other  officers  of both  organisations give
themselves  out  as  embassy  diplomats  too.  They  all prefer  to  concern
themselves  with  technological  and scientific questions, and  questions of
transport and communications; they are  rarely found  in cultural  sections.
The consulate is entirely KGB. You  will almost never  find  officers of the
GRU there  and only very rarely genuine diplomats. This is because all  exit
and  entry from and to  the Soviet  Union is  in the hands of the  KGB.  KGB
officers in the consulate issue  visas, and the  frontier forces  of the KGB
then  control them later  on. Every  aspect of immigration and of flight and
defection  has  some connection with consular affairs, which therefore  rank
extremely high  in  the  KGB's  sphere  of interest. So it follows  that the
percentage of KGB officers in  consulates is  unusually high, even by Soviet
standards.  (There do exist very rare instances of  GRU officers working  in
consulates.  The  KGB  only  agrees  to  this on the  grounds  of  practical
considerations, and so that it  should  not  appear to  be too one- sided an
organisation.)
     Aeroflot, the Soviet civil airline, is the exclusive domain of the GRU.
This  can be explained by the fact that  aviation technology  is of  extreme
interest  to the Soviet armaments industry, and there is huge scope  for any
Aeroflot  employee  to  inform  himself  about  the  progress  of  the West:
international  exhibitions,  meetings  with representatives of  the  leading
aviation  and   space  corporations,  perfectly  justifiable  meetings  with
representatives of firms producing aviation electronics,  oils,  lubricants,
fuels, high-tension materials, heat  isolators and aero-engines. Usually the
firms  which  produce  civil aircraft  also  produce  military aircraft  and
rockets, and in  this field lie  the GRU's  richest pickings. Happily, those
officers  whom the GRU selects at  advanced aviation institutes  for work in
Aeroflot  do  not  need  lengthy  specialist  instruction.  Sometimes Soviet
military  and  civil aircraft  have identical parts.  KGB officers are  only
rarely  employed  at Aeroflot,  and then for  the same reasons as the GRU in
consular affairs. The merchant navy is almost identical, the only difference
being that the officers there are selected to  study cruisers and submarines
and not strategic  aviation.  An organisation  of exceptional  importance to
both services is the Trade Representation, that is the organ of the Ministry
of  External Trade.  Literally swarming  with  KGB  and GRU  officers,  this
organisation provides exceptional access to business people whom both strive
to  exploit  for their  own ends.  Representation  in Tass, APN,  Pravda and
Izvestia are almost forbidden ground for the GRU. Even the KGB in this field
has very narrow powers. Press matters are very carefully kept in the Central
Committee's own hands, therefore KGB officers and officers of the GRU do not
occupy key posts in these  organisations. This does not  mean of course that
their secret activities suffer in any way.
     Intourist  is in the KGB's hands, so  much so that it  is  not just  an
organisation strongly influenced by the KGB,  but  an  actual branch  of the
KGB.  Beginning  with   the  construction  of  hotels  and  the  putting  of
advertisements in the  papers, and ending with the recruitment of foreigners
in  those same hotels, it is all run entirely  by the  KGB. GRU officers are
found in  Intourist,  but rarely. There does  exist, however, one rule which
admits  of no  exceptions. Anything  to  do with  the military  attaches  is
staffed  exclusively by officers  of the  GRU. Here  there  are  no  genuine
diplomats, nor KGB. The naval, military and air attaches are regarded by the
GRU as its particular  brand of cover. In the  West one is accustomed to see
in these people not spies but military diplomats, and one  assumes that this
has  spread to  one's Soviet  colleagues. This deep misapprehension is fully
exploited  by  the  GRU.  Whenever  you  talk to  a Soviet military attache,
remember  always  that  before  you stands at  the very least an operational
officer  of  an  undercover  residency  who is  faced with  the  problem  of
recruiting foreigners and who, if he  does not  recruit a single  foreigner,
sees all his other  work become insignificant and all his hopes of a shining
career  crash to the ground. Look into his  eyes and ask him how much longer
he has to serve in this hospitable country and if in his answer you perceive
a note of anguish, then be on your guard, for he will recruit you if he can.
But perhaps he is  happy with life and his eyes express pleasure. This means
he has recruited one of your  fellow- countrymen. Possibly there even stands
in front of you a deputy resident or the GRU  resident himself. Fear him and
be  careful of  him. He is dangerous. He is experienced and cunning like  an
old hand should be. This is not his first time abroad, and that means he has
already chalked up a significant number of successful recruits.
<ul><a name=15></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     Every  GRU officer in  an  undercover residency, whatever his  official
duties may be, and under whatever cover he masquerades, has his place in the
general structure of the secret hierarchy. What we see in daily life is only
the  performance the  GRU wishes  to  show  us.  Internal  relations  in  an
undercover residency have no bearing whatsoever on external, official ranks.
Military ranks  play an insignificant role. The important role is the actual
job of the officer  in the  residency. There have been cases where residents
with  an eye to  cover  have  occupied completely insignificant posts within
embassies.  At the same  time  the  resident  remains the  resident  and his
authority is  unshakeable.  Within  the  residency  he  remains  the strict,
tyrannical, frequently wilful boss  who during his briefings will frequently
attack  the  military attaches -  even though in  his  life  as seen  by the
outside  world he plays  the part  of  doorman  for those same attaches. The
second   most   important  person,  the  deputy  resident,  may  only  be  a
lieutenant-colonel with operational officers who  are colonels but this does
not prevent him from talking to them as he would to captains or lieutenants.
They are only operational  officers, while the  GRU has  decreed that  he, a
lieutenant-colonel, is better than  them, full  colonels though they may be,
and has  given  him  full  powers  to dispose of them and  order them about.
Official  cover again  plays absolutely  no part. An operational officer may
assume the official duty  of assistant  to a military  attache  or  military
attache himself,  but still have the deputy resident  as  his  own  personal
driver. The deputy resident is no way  suffers from this.  His  situation is
analogous to that of the Sicilian waiter who, off duty, is senior in rank to
the restaurant owner within the Mafia hierarchy.
     All  operational officers are legal equals, from  senior lieutenants to
full colonels. Their seniority in the  residency, however, is established by
the resident exclusively on the basis of the quantity  and  quality of their
recruitments.  Recruitment work is the sole criterion for all  GRU officers,
regardless  of age, rank or official duties. Their relations with each other
in the residency might be compared  with the relationships existing  between
fighter pilots in time  of war. They also, in  their  own circle, pay little
attention to length of service  or military rank. Their criterion of respect
for a man is the number of enemy aircraft he has shot down, and a lieutenant
who has shot down ten  aircraft may patronisingly  slap  on the  shoulder  a
major  who  has  not  shot  down  a  single  aircraft. The attitude  of  the
operational  staff engaged in  recruitment  work  to  other officers may  be
summed up by comparison with the attitude of the fliers and the ground staff
at a  fighter  base:  'I  fly  in the  sky and  you shovel shit.'  The  only
exception to this attitude is the radio/cipher officer, to whom all show the
greatest  respect,  because he  knows much more  about intelligence  matters
concerning the residency than the deputy resident.
<ul><a name=16></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     Let us  take a typically large residency as an example  and examine it.
Everything is factual. The resident is  a Major-General A  and  his official
cover  (relatively  unimportant),  is  First  Secretary,  Embassy.  Directly
beneath   him  are  a  group  of  five  radio/cipher  officers,  three  very
experienced operational officers  (one of whom runs an agent  group, and two
others   who   run  especially  valuable  agent-sources),  and  four  deputy
residents. They are:
     Colonel  B, cover  Deputy  Trade  Representative.  He  has  twelve  GRU
officers  below  him,  all working in the  Trade  Representation. He  is  in
contact with  one agent. One  of his officers runs an  agent group  of three
agents. Another is in contact with  two  agents and a  third officer has one
agent. The remaining officers have as yet no agents.
     Lt-Colonel  C,  cover Assistant  to the  Naval  Attache.  He  has  many
operational  officers beneath  him, two of whom work in  the  Merchant  Navy
Representation,  three  in  Aeroflot,  five  in the  Embassy and ten  in the
departments  of  the  Military,  Naval and Air  Attaches. All three  of  the
military departments are considered to be a diplomatic unit independent from
each  other and  from the  Embassy.  However,  in  this case,  all  officers
entering the three military  departments including  the  three  attaches are
beneath  one assistant military attache. The deputy resident is  in  contact
with one agent. Twelve other operational  officers subordinate  to him  have
one agent  each. The remainder have acquaintances  who  are to  be recruited
within one to two years. In  addition to his agent-running work, this deputy
resident is responsible for information work in the whole residency.
     Colonel  D,  cover  First  Secretary,   Embassy  (deputy  resident  for
illegals).  This  deputy  resident  has  no agent  and  does  not carry  out
recruitment work. He  has no officers  beneath  him, but when he is carrying
out  operations in the interests of illegals, he  can make use of any of the
best officers of the first and second groups.
     Lt-Colonel E, cover Second  Secretary, Embassy. He is in  contact  with
one  agent. One operational officer is subordinate to him, disguised  as the
military  attache's  driver,  and this  officer  runs  an  agent  group.  In
addition, this deputy resident controls the following: one technical service
group  (six officers), one  group  for the study of  operational  conditions
(four officers),  one group  of  operational  technique  (two officers), the
radio  monitoring  station (three  officers),  five officers of the internal
security guards for the residency and one accounts officer.
<ul><a name=17></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     In  all  there  are  sixty-seven  officers in  the residency,  of  whom
forty-one are operational staff,  twenty operational technological staff and
six  technical  staff.  The  residency  has  thirty-six   agents,  of   whom
twenty-five work independently of each other.
     In some  cases part of the undercover residency, under the  command  of
one of the deputy residents, functions in another  city permanently detached
from the basic forces of the  main residency. This is true, for example,  of
Holland, where the undercover residency is located in The Hague but part  of
the residency  is  in Amsterdam. Such an arrangement  complicates work  to a
considerable degree but in  the opinion of the GRU it is better  to have two
small residencies than one big one. In this  case  any failure in one of the
residencies does not reflect  on the activities of the other. Everywhere  it
is possible,  the GRU  endeavours to organise new,  independent residencies.
For this it has to observe  two basic conditions:  the  presence of official
Soviet diplomatic representation - an embassy, consulate, military attache's
department, military communications mission or a  permanent UN  mission; and
the  presence  of an officially  registered radio station  in direct contact
with  Moscow.  Where these two conditions obtain, residencies can be quickly
organised,  even  the very smallest possible,  consisting  of  two  men  but
independent and self-contained.
     Apart from the security angle, this practice also  ensures parallelism,
as the GRU can control one resident by means of another. Such  possibilities
are open  to Soviet  intelligence in many  countries. For  example, in Paris
there is  one of  the most  expansionist undercover residencies  of the GRU.
Independent of it in Marseilles  there  is another, smaller residency. Their
performance is vastly enhanced by the fierce  competition between  them.  In
West  Germany the GRU has  been able  to  create five  residencies. Wherever
there is official Soviet  diplomatic representation with radio transmission,
there is also an undercover residency  of  the  GRU. In many  cases there is
also  an  undercover residency of the  KGB. But while the residencies of the
GRU are organised in any official mission - civil, military or mixed - those
of the KGB are not. In Marseilles, New York, Amsterdam,  Geneva and Montreal
the Soviet missions are  clearly  civil, and in  all  these cities there are
undercover residencies of both KGB and GRU. But where the mission is clearly
military, as for example the Soviet observation mission in West Germany, the
KGB may not have a residency. This also applies  to the numerous missions of
Soviet military advisers in developing countries. The KGB presence  there is
only for the maintenance of security among the genuine military advisers.
     In speaking  about the  undercover  residency  we  must  not forget  to
mention another category of people  participating in espionage  activities -
co-opted personnel. These are Soviet citizens abroad who are not officers of
the  GRU  or  the  KGB,  but  fulfil  a number  of tasks  set them by  these
organisations.  The  co-opted person may  be of  any  rank  from  doorman to
ambassador  and  he carries  out very different  tasks,  from studies of the
foreigners surrounding him to clearing dead-letter boxes. The KGB has always
been  interested in the  exploitation  of co-opted  persons;  following  the
principle of 'don't stick your own neck out if you  can get somebody else to
stick  it out for you'.  The GRU is not so keen, using co-opted persons only
in exceptional  cases. Its guiding principle is: 'don't trust even your best
friend  with  your motor  car,  girlfriend -  or agent'. The  rewards for  a
co-opted person are monetary ones which, unlike  the  basic salary, are  not
subject  to   tax.   Usually  in   every  embassy,   consulate   and   trade
representation, out of every ten 'clean' officials, seven are  co-opted onto
the  KGB staff,  one onto the GRU staff; only the remaining  two  are clean.
Either  they are complete idiots,  or the  sons  of members  of the  Central
Committee whom  wild horses  could  not  force to  have anything  to do with
intelligence. In other words, in Soviet official institutions, it is a very,
very  tricky  matter indeed to  meet a  man  who  has  no  connections  with
intelligence.

     Chapter Three
     Agents
     In present-day  Soviet  intelligence  terminology  the term 'agent' has
only one meaning. An  agent is  a foreigner recruited by Soviet intelligence
and carrying out secret tasks on its behalf. All agents, irrespective of the
group or section  of  the GRU to  which they  belong, are  divided  into two
groups: the basic agent and the supplementary agent.  Basic agents fall into
four categories: they are residents or group leaders; they are  providers of
information; they are executive agents whose main  task is to kill;  or they
are  recruiting agents. In  the  supplementary group are wireless operators,
legalising  agents, documentalists,  the owners  of safe  houses, addresses,
telephones and radio transmission points.
     Head Agents
     Head  agents are the  leaders of agent groups and agent residents. Head
agents  are selected  from the most experienced agents  available,  men  and
women who have  had long  years of service and  have given  proof  of  their
devotion to duty. They are invested with wide powers and possess significant
financial  independence. In cases where the organisation  entrusted  to them
collapses, the  head  agent must take the  decision to do away with unwanted
people who pose a threat to it. In  this and other emergencies he can always
count on the full support of the GRU.
     The difference between the group  leader and the agent resident is that
the group leader may  take a whole range of important  decisions  concerning
the group entrusted to him, but he  may not recruit agents at all. The agent
resident  has  a  wider   range  of  interests,  the  most  important  being
recruitment. The  group  leader may be subordinate to the residency, to  the
illegal,  undercover or agent residency  or directly to  the Centre, but the
agent resident may only be subordinate to the Centre.
     Sources
     These are  agents who directly  obtain secret information, documents or
samples  of  military  technology and weaponry.  In the recruitment of  such
people, it is  first  and  foremost  their  access  to  political, military,
technological  and other  secrets which is taken into account. It is clearly
unnecessary  to recruit an  officer from the Ministry of  Defence if one can
recruit his secretary.  In  other words, the GRU  has  contact  with  people
occupying relatively  unimportant posts but with  possibly greater knowledge
than  their superiors. With this in mind, apart from secretaries, the people
of special interest to the  GRU are workers  in printing and  typing offices
which  produce  secret  documents,  cipher  officers,  diplomatic  couriers,
computer operators, communications clerks, draughtsmen  and other  technical
personnel.
     Executive Agents
     These are agents recruited  to carry out assassinations, diversions  or
sabotage. The recruitment of  executive agents is not usually carried out by
the  central GRU,  but by the local organs of the GRU—the military  district
departments.   Sometimes   even   strategic   intelligence   needs   similar
specialists, but in smaller number.
     Executive  agents  are recruited from criminal elements and  from  that
band  of  naturally  brutish  characters  who,  with  passing  time,  become
accustomed to executing  any orders they  are given.  Frequently agents  who
have been  acting as providers of  information are  transferred by both  the
strategic and  operational branches of the  GRU to the category of executive
agent, in cases where they may have lost their access.
     Agent Recruiters
     These are the most devoted and thoroughly  tested  agents,  people  who
either never had access or who have lost it. As their name suggests, the GRU
uses them solely for the recruitment of new agents. The most successful will
eventually become group leader or sometimes agent resident.
     Agent Legalisers
     These are subsidiary agents. They work in the interests of illegals and
as a rule are  recruited  and  run  only  by  illegals.  Candidate  for this
category of agents are sought among  officials of  the  police land passport
departments,  consular clerks, customs and immigration  officials, and small
employers  of labour. Agent legalisers are subjected to especially  thorough
vetting, because the  fate of  illegals is  entrusted to them. When a Soviet
illegal arrives in a country the task of  the legalising  agent is to ensure
the issue  of documents  by making the necessary entries in the registration
books and  to  ensure  that  the illegal is  in possession of the  necessary
documentation.
     In  the  history of  the  GRU  quite a few  priests carrying  falsified
documents and registers  of baptism and death have given  immense service to
illegals who, on the basis  of false entries, have  been able to obtain  the
necessary  documents. A similar role to  that  of  the  legalising agent  is
played by  the documentation agents. These are recruited  by the  undercover
residency and their job is to obtain passports, driving licences and samples
of official  police  forms.  In contradistinction to the legalising  agents,
documentation agents  do not have any direct contact with illegals. Although
they obtain tens and sometimes hundreds, even  thousands  of passports, they
have no direct  knowledge  of how and when the  GRU  is  going  to use them.
Frequently the GRU uses the  passports obtained through the good offices  of
documentation  agents  only  as  a  sample  for the  preparation of  similar
falsified copies. Documentation agents  may be recruited from among criminal
classes  who are occupied with  the forging  and selling of documents on the
black market and also from clerks concerned with the  production, inventory,
storage  and  issue  of  passports.  Frequently  documentation  agents  have
successfully worked among poor students, persuading  them,  for  a financial
consideration, to lose their passports.
     Couriers
     These are supplementary  agents engaged in transporting agent materials
over  state  frontiers. Obviously  it is  not  necessary  to employ  special
couriers to transport the material into the Soviet Union or its satellites.
     The basic flow of agent  material which is  not  subject  to particular
suspicion  goes  from  countries with hard  regimes into countries with more
soft  regimes.  In  the  opinion  of  the GRU,  an opinion  fortified by the
experience of many years, the hardest  country is Great Britain, followed by
France, the  United  States,  the  Federal Republic of Germany, Belgium  and
Holland.  As soft countries  the  GRU includes Finland, Ireland  and Austria
among others.
     The  GRU also makes very wide use of countries  of the Third  World for
this purpose, and couriers may sometimes make  very long journeys before the
material finally arrives  in the  hands of the GRU.  Examples  are  known of
material obtained in the United States going first to Latin America, then to
Africa  and  only  from  Africa  being  conveyed  to  the Soviet  Union.  In
recruiting  couriers, the GRU pays  particular attention to the  drivers and
guards  of  long-distance  trains,  commercial  travellers  and  sailors  of
merchant  fleets.  When  hi-jacking  of  aircraft  became  more frequent and
controls at airports became stricter, the  GRU virtually gave up  recruiting
the crews of airliners. If it uses these at all, it is only for transporting
small-sized non-metallic objects.
     The Owner of a Safe House or Flat
     He  is a  supplementary agent  occupying a  position  of  great  trust,
usually recruited from among house-owners, concierges and hotel owners, in a
word,  all those who possess  not one but several flats or  dwelling places.
The term 'safe flat' should be understood not only in its generally accepted
meaning but also as a well-equipped cellar, attic, garage or store. For safe
flats the  GRU selects quiet secluded places where they may want to be  able
to hide  a man  sometimes for a length  of  several  months;  to  carry  out
meetings,  briefings  and   de-briefings;  to   change  clothes  and  change
appearances; and to hide  stolen materials and  photograph stolen documents.
The owner of a safe house or flat is known in the colloquial language of the
GRU by the abbreviation 'KK'.
     The Safe Address Owner
     He is an  agent who receives and transmits secret messages for the GRU,
usually recruited from among those people who receive copious correspondence
from abroad;  the  work  is  normally  restricted  to inhabitants  of 'soft'
countries. Sources who have  obtained information and  intelligence  in hard
countries send letters in SW to these addresses and the owners transmit  the
correspondence to officers  of  the  undercover residency.  One  interesting
aspect of recruitment is that the GRU  prefers  middle-aged people who would
not be affected by general mobilisation in the country, so that the chain of
communication is not interrupted.
     The  possessors of secret telephones  and, more recently,  teleprinters
are recruited by the same rules  applied to the owners of secret  addresses.
In GRU language these types of agent networks and their possessors are known
by the abbreviations 'KA', 'KT', 'KTP'.
     The owners  of  transmitting points  are used  for  transmitting  agent
materials within  the  limits  of one city or area.  Usually they are street
sellers in  small kiosks, stalls or paper stalls. An  agent who has acquired
intelligence will stop and hand over the material to the owner. Hours later,
sometimes  days, GRU officers will  visit the stall  to collect the material
and hand  over money  for the agents together  with new  instructions.  This
avoids direct contact  between  the  GRU  and the  agent. Increased security
might mean the source agent using a  dead-letter  box which the stall holder
will  empty,  not  knowing who  has filled  it.  The GRU  will  announce the
dead-letter box's whereabouts to the transmitting point  only  after it  has
been filled. A different one will be used for each operation, and so even if
the police discover that the GRU has a special interest in the small shop or
stall and  subsequently establishes that this stall serves as a transmitting
point,  it  will still be  very difficult to discover  the source agent.  To
mount a surveillance operation in  the neighbourhood of the  dead-letter box
is impossible since the transmitting point only  acquires its location after
it  has been  filled;  the agent himself  has  disappeared long before.  The
transmitting point is known by the abbreviation 'PP'.
<ul><a name=18></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     In examining different kinds of agents, people  from the free world who
have sold  themselves  to the  GRU, one cannot avoid touching on yet another
category,  perhaps the least appealing of all. Officially one is not allowed
to  call them agents, and  they are not agents  in the  full  sense of being
recruited  agents.  We  are talking  about the numerous members of  overseas
societies  of friendship  with  the  Soviet  Union.  Officially,  all Soviet
representatives regard these parasites with touching feelings of friendship,
but privately they call them 'shit-eaters'  ('govnoed'). It  is difficult to
say where this expression  originated, but  it is  truly the only name  they
deserve. The  use  of this word  has become  so firmly  entrenched in Soviet
embassies that it is impossible to imagine  any other name for these people.
A  conversation might run as follows: Today  we've got a  friendship evening
with shit-eaters', or Today we're having some shit-eaters to dinner. Prepare
a suitable menu'.
     Officers of  both the GRU and the KGB have very much  more  respect for
their agents than for the shit-eaters. The motives of agents are  clear - an
easy life and plenty of money. If you take risks and lose, then no money and
no easy life. To  the  end of his life  the agent will not  be  able to tear
himself away from this servitude - as is the case in the criminal world. But
the  behaviour of  the  numerous  friends  of the  Soviet  Union  is utterly
incomprehensible  to Soviet people.  In  the Soviet  Union everybody without
exception wishes to be abroad, to go absolutely anywhere, even  if only with
one eye to look at Mongolia or  Cambodia. Oh!  to be abroad, is the cry, led
by the children of  Brezhnev, Gromyko and Andropov. When Soviet people  want
to say that a  thing is outstandingly  good, they say, 'Really, this must be
foreign.'  It  does not  matter which  country  it  comes  from, or what its
quality or age - it has to be foreign. But suddenly one finds these  friends
of  the  Soviet Union,  who enjoy  all  the fruits  of civilisation down  to
Gillette razor  blades, who  can  buy anything  they want in the shops, even
bananas, and yet they praise the Soviet Union. No,  these people are nothing
but shit-eaters according to Soviet intelligence. The contempt felt for them
does not prevent  the GRU and KGB from using them whenever they can. They do
everything free, and  they will even come to meetings in secure  places like
the Soviet Embassy.
     The recruitment  of  such  people is not  recommended  by  the  Central
Committee, but  why bother to  recruit them when  they bring such advantages
without being recruited?  The GRU usually makes  use  of the shit-eaters 'in
the dark', in other words not saying what they are used for or how much they
benefit from their  services.  They  usually ask from them information about
their  neighbours,  friends,  acquaintances,  fellow  workers  and   so  on.
Sometimes one  of them is  asked to organise an  evening  party with one  or
another of  his acquaintances, after which the GRU thanks him  and tells him
to  forget  what  has  happened.  They  are  very  good people, they  forget
everything.

     Chapter Four
     Agent Recruiting
     Agent  recruiting  is  the most  important task  of both strategic  and
operational  intelligence.  No  real  problems  can be  solved without agent
penetration in  basic government, military  and technological centres of the
enemy.
     In the previous chapter we examined the types of secret agents and also
the various differences between them. It would not be an exaggeration to say
that any citizen of the West, having been recruited by the GRU, may be  used
very  effectively  for intelligence purposes, some  for  the  acquisition of
secret   documents,  some  for  assassinating  people,   and  some  for  the
transporting of agent  materials. No citizen of any age and either sex would
be  idle  for  long  once  he  or  she  fell  into  the  hands  of the  GRU.
Nevertheless, basic importance is attached to  the provider of  information.
Long  experience  has persuaded the  GRU that  it is  essential above all to
recruit  sources, and  only after the GRU has acquired through these sources
all possible material may  the source himself be used for other purposes, as
a recruiter, head agent or supplementary agent. The GRU  is convinced that a
former  source  who  is  now  working,  for  example,  as  the  owner  of  a
transmitting point will  never on his  own initiative go to  the police; but
the same cannot  be said of agents who have never provided  secrets for  the
GRU, who have  not  had firm contacts  with them. The  search  for  suitable
candidates is implemented  at  the same time in certain different ways:  the
scrupulous collection of  information on  persons  of  interest to  the  GRU
including government institutions for staffs, military bases, design bureaux
and people connected with these targets; the study of all foreigners without
exception who  have any  contacts at all with officers  of the  GRU; and the
gradual  widening  of  circles of  acquaintances  among  foreigners.  If  an
operational officer has a hundred acquaintances, one of these must surely be
a potential provider of information which will be of interest.
     A  candidate  for recruitment must fulfil the  following conditions: he
must have agent potential, that  is he must  be  in the position to  provide
information of real use to  the  GRU, either  to steal or  copy secrets,  to
communicate secret information  by word of mouth,  or to recruit new agents.
There must exist motives by means of which he may be recruited - displeasure
with the regime or other political motives, personal  financial problems, or
private motives like a desire for revenge on somebody or secret crimes which
he is trying to hide. It is  desirable that  he be  sympathetic to communism
without   being  a  communist.  Communist  parties   everywhere  have   been
compromised to  a certain extent by their contacts with the KGB and the GRU,
and  it  is  always recommended that agents recruited from communist parties
should leave the party.
     After the selection of a  candidate for recruitment, the second stage -
tracing and vetting - commences. Details are collected about the  candidate,
details which may be obtained through reference books, telephone directories
and the press;  the task of obtaining  all  available information  about the
candidate  may well be given  to  other agents.  The GRU may equally  want a
surveillance on him to collect extra data about his daily life. This process
sometimes gives  very gratifying results. Up to now the person  himself does
not suspect  that  the GRU  exists  and  he  has  had no  contact  with  its
representatives, but it  already has a considerable wealth of detail on him.
Subsequently the  GRU enters the process of cultivation, which consists in a
further definition of motives which  will be used in  the actual recruitment
of  the person. It also tries to exacerbate his weaknesses:  for example, if
the man experiences financial problems, the GRU will endeavour  to make them
worse. If he is displeased with the political regime, the GRU will endeavour
to turn  his displeasure into hatred. The cultivation process may be carried
out after the establishment  of an acquaintanceship with the  candidate. The
whole process,  from  the  beginning  of the search  for  a candidate to the
completion of  a  cultivation period, normally extends  for not less than  a
year; only after this does actual recruitment take place.
     There are two principal methods of recruitment,  the  gradual  approach
and  the crash approach. The crash  approach is the  highest class of  agent
work. The GRU may authorise the resident to mount such an operation only  if
the resident has been able to provide good  arguments for the taking of such
a  risk. Quite a few examples are known of recruitment at the first meeting,
of course  following  the  secret  cultivation  which has  gone  on for many
months. It was in this  way that many American creators of the  first atomic
bomb were recruited. Their subsequent argument was that it was as  a mark of
protest against the  bombing of the Japanese cities that they, on  their own
initiative, established contact with Soviet intelligence. However, for  some
reason they forgot to add that this contact had been established long before
the first experiments with the bomb,  when there was  no cause  for protest.
They also  evaded the question as to  how several people, simultaneously and
independently  from one another,  established  contact  with  the undercover
residency of the GRU in Canada, but not with the undercover residency of the
KGB in Mexico, for example.
     The crash approach,  or  'love at first  sight' in  GRU  jargon,  has a
number of irrefutable advantages. Contact with the  future agent takes place
only once, instead of at meetings over many  months, as is the case with the
gradual approach. After  the first  contact  the newly recruited  agent will
himself take  action on his own security. He will never talk to his wife, or
tell her that he has a charming friend in the Soviet military attache who is
also very interested in stamp collecting.
     In  the gradual approach method, this sort of thing happens  very, very
often. The candidate has as yet not felt the deadly grip of the GRU, has not
yet understood what it wants from him. He still nourishes his illusions, and
naturally he  will not hide his good  friendship with  such charming people.
However,   the  gradual  approach  method,  despite  its  shortcomings,   is
frequently used. The fact is that the GRU is not always,  indeed not even in
the majority of cases, able to collect a sufficient amount of material about
the  candidate  without  his  knowledge  to  prepare  him  sufficiently  for
recruitment. In  many cases it is necessary to establish contact  and to use
each  meeting  with  the candidate to  study  his  motives and  to carry out
vetting and cultivation.
     Having established contact,  the  operational  officer  tries  by every
possible method to avoid 'blowing' the candidate; that is, he tries to  hide
the connection from the police, from  friends  and acquaintances of the  man
himself, and also from his own fellow countrymen. The only people who should
know anything about an agent and therefore about candidates for  recruitment
are the resident, the deputy resident  and of course the cipher  officer and
the  Centre - nobody else.  In order  that he should  not blow the candidate
from the very first  meeting, the  operational officer will try to carry out
meetings in secluded  restaurants, cafes, bars far from  the place where the
candidate lives and far from his place of work. At all costs he will  try to
avoid  the candidate telephoning  him  either at home or in  the embassy. He
will try to  avoid  the  candidate visiting Soviet official institutions and
places where Soviet people gather together. He  will  decline invitations to
meet the  candidate's  family or visit  his home. (The particular pretexts I
used were that  my  office was far too  busy, or I was  never  there, so the
candidate would not ring; at home, I would tell  him, there was a small baby
who slept  badly. Of course, in order to appear serious, I  had  to give him
the telephone numbers with my business card.) After the acquaintanceship has
ripened,  the  GRU officer will  try  to  make  every subsequent  meeting as
interesting and  useful as  possible  for  the candidate.  If they  exchange
postage stamps,  then the Soviet,  by apparent mistake or out of friendship,
will give the future  agent a very valuable stamp. The  officer may then ask
for a very innocent and insignificant  favour from the man and pay him  very
generously for it.  During this stage the  most important thing  is that the
future agent becomes accustomed  to being asked  favours and fulfilling them
accurately. It does  not matter what sort  of favours or services. Maybe  he
will be asked to accept at  his  address and forward to the officers letters
ostensibly from  his  mistress,  or to  buy  a  complete  set  of  telephone
directories and give them to the officer  as if he did not know how or where
this could be done. By degrees the  tasks  become more  complicated, but the
payment  for them grows equally. Perhaps he will be asked  to acquire in his
name some works of reference which  are not on sale and are distributed only
on signature, or he will be asked to talk about and describe his friends who
work with him. In many cases the actual recruitment proposal  is never made,
as the  candidate gradually becomes an agent of the GRU without having fully
realised it. He may consider that he is  simply doing his business and doing
favours for a good  friend. Then, much to his surprise, the man will one day
find that all  ways of extricating himself have been cut off, and that he is
deeply  ensnared  in espionage work. After he  has become  aware of this for
himself, the GRU informs him what the affair is all about and there begins a
new stage. The tasks become more serious but the payment  for them gradually
decreases. This is done on the pretext of his own security. What  can he do?
Go on strike?
     There  exists  yet  another  method of  recruitment,  perhaps  the most
effective  and secure. This  method  was worked out by the GRU in  the first
decade after the war and seems  not to be used by  the  KGB. It can  only be
used at exhibitions and only against the owners of small firms which produce
military  material.  In  spite  of the fact  that  the method  has  so  many
limitations,  including  the impossibility  of recruiting generals and their
secretaries, and equally its  complete unacceptability for illegals it does,
however, give positive  results. It is very similar  to the direct approach,
but is distinct from the  classical 'love  at first sight' in that a lengthy
search for a candidate, his tracing, vetting and cultivation are absent.
     Before  the opening of exhibitions  of  military electronics, armaments
and military technology,  ship-building and engine-building conferences, air
shows  and  so on,  hundreds  of  which  take place every year, a scientific
delegation appears at the GRU  residency with a  list of everything which is
essential for the Soviet military and the armaments industry. The experts of
course know that  at the exhibition  there will be  demonstrations of models
whose sale to the  Soviet Union is  categorically prohibited. None the less,
the delegation will carry suitcases  crammed full of money, with full powers
to  spend it  as they wish. All expenditure is approved  and  justified. The
examination and  construction  of  such  samples  as they have  been able to
obtain  in the Soviet  Union  will  occupy much  more  time  and  money. The
delegation  visits  the  exhibition  and  looks  at the  stands  of  the big
corporations only to disguise its real object. At each of these stands these
are several  salesmen and guides,  any one or all of which may  be from  the
security services. The delegation is only really interested in the stands of
small  firms  where the explanations  are  carried  out  by the  owner or  a
director  himself. The  delegation  gets into  conversation with  him and an
officer of the local GRU residency acts the part of interpreter. The experts
pass themselves off as an official Soviet delegation. At  the same time they
manage to let the operational officer know  that  they have arrived at  just
such a firm as  could be of use to them  and that  the exhibit is not just a
model, but an actual piece. 'Is it really forbidden to buy such a piece? Oh!
What a pity. Nothing to be done, but tell us, how much does it cost? 20,000?
How cheap! We would pay twenty times that much  for such a piece! Great pity
that it is not for sale.' All this in a light-hearted way, as if incidental.
The  conversation  turns  to  another  subject.  After  a  few  minutes  the
delegation takes its leave in  a  friendly way. The interpreter stays behind
for  a few seconds. 'It was  so nice meeting you.  Could we not continue our
talk over dinner this evening? No? You're busy? What a pity. Many thanks. It
was very nice to make your acquaintance.' And that is all, nothing criminal,
just  a short, friendly  conversation. The Soviet delegation did not propose
anything  to anybody. It  did  not ask,  it did not demand.  It  was  merely
interested. In the meantime the delegation  goes on with its inspection. The
exhibition  is huge, hundreds of firms, and the list of essential things  is
too long. Another stand, another firm, the same result, it  does not matter.
Not everything has  been  lost. There are still more stands.  'How much does
this piece cost? 25,000? Only 25,000, we would give half a million for that.
Great pity  that it's not for sale.' The delegation goes on. The interpreter
stays  for a few seconds. 'Could I not invite you to dinner this evening  in
the restaurant?' 'I  don't know whether that  would be all right.  We hardly
know  each other.'  And  that  is  all.  Recruitment  is  accomplished.  The
delegation continues its inspection. New interpreters are provided. Drinking
martinis in the bar, they wait their  turn. The exhibition is huge. Hundreds
of firms and the list of equipment wanted by their government is very long.
     The GRU's calculation has shown itself to be  unfailing. The owner of a
small firm, even a very successful one, is always at great risk, always keen
to strengthen his  situation.  When he receives a proposal  to sell his  own
wares at a price fifteen to twenty times the highest normal price, he thinks
to  himself: this  is  a  matter  of industrial  espionage, which in several
countries is not even considered a  criminal offence. From the first  moment
he knows  what is wanted  from him  and carefully evaluates the step that he
decides  on. In any case,  if he sells his product he can hide the fact from
the authorities.  It  is  equally  easy for him  to hide  the  money  he has
received. The only  thing he has not taken into consideration  is the  wolf-
like greed  of  the GRU.  He hopes to dispose  of the products of his  firm,
supposing that this will be sufficient. He is deeply mistaken. Having bought
the first model or set  of documents, certainly  at a  staggering price, the
GRU  will later on  lower the  prices and finally  dictate  them. One  might
object  that the really big secrets are all  in the hands of the big  firms,
but  this is not  absolutely  true.  Very  often  Soviet designers  are  not
interested in the whole rocket or the whole aircraft, but only in some small
part - an  engine, a steering system or some particular instrument  (in many
cases not even an  important  part but only a membrane,  a heat sink or some
such  thing) - exactly  the  sort of thing  that  would  be  produced  by  a
components manufacturer. And  of course recruitment in small firms  does not
in any way hinder the GRU's attempts to penetrate  large firms. Far from it.
After he has been milked, the owner of  a components manufacturing firm, now
turned  agent, must turn his attention to the recruitment of other agents in
the big firms  to which he  supplies his parts. Then suddenly in  the Soviet
Union an aircraft exactly like  Concorde  appears. (To blame the GRU for the
trials  and  difficulties  of the TU144  Concordski  is not justified.  Weak
Soviet industry, using antediluvian  technology, was simply not able to copy
the  aeroplane  properly,  despite  having  all the  necessary drawings  and
documents.) Recently, the  number of  exhibition recruitments by the GRU has
steadily increased.  They have  been facilitated by the  fact that in  these
recruitments the  GRU does not spend one rouble of its own  money. The money
which  the delegation brings  with it  to the exhibition  comes  out  of the
budget of the armaments industry which is ready to spend as much money as it
has to in profitable business. For its money the armaments industry receives
essential  documents  and samples, and  the  GRU,  without paying  a  penny,
receives  an  agent who will  serve it for long years afterwards. Exhibition
recruitments are  also  attractive  because  they can  be carried  out  with
complete  impunity. Only one case of detection is known,  an air  show at Le
Bourget  when  the  assistant  Soviet  military  attache  was  detained  for
endeavouring to carry out just such a recruitment. He was detained, but  not
for long because  a  military  diplomat cannot be held. Declared persona non
grata,  after  three years he went to  another country  in  another official
capacity  as  a deputy  resident. The only thing which  is  not clear in all
these  stories is the attitude  of those countries who joyfully accept these
supposed 'diplomats'.
     As for GRU illegals, they basically use the first two methods. The work
of illegals  of course is made easier  by the obvious simplification of  the
search for candidates and their tracing and  vetting. Since  they very often
play the part of bona  jide business people they come into frequent  contact
with  the  owners  of  firms producing military  material,  and by means  of
proposing advantageous  deals,  they gradually attract these people  to play
the part of agents. There is another  very important factor. Illegals hardly
ever recruit  in the name of Soviet intelligence. They always assume another
guise. In  Japan, for  example,  they may  pass themselves off  as  American
industrial  spies,  in  Northern  Ireland as  an organisation  going  in for
terrorist  activities  against   the  English  military  presence,  in  Arab
countries  as anti-Zionists.  In  countries  with  dictatorial  regimes  GRU
illegals  recruit  people  in  the  name  of  anti-government  organisations
carrying on the underground struggle against tyranny. A method often used by
illegals is to pass themselves off as supporters of separatist movements. It
is  only necessary for  the illegal to know  some of the important political
views in order to  be able  to adopt them for himself and begin  recruiting.
Sometimes  such  recruitments  are  implemented  very  quickly  and  without
problems.  'We are representatives of  such and such a liberation army, this
or that red brigade. Can't  you help us?  If you can't we ask you not to let
anybody know about our visit.' The  candidate is then  recruited in the name
of  an  organisation for  which  he  feels  sympathy  and he  gratifies  his
conscience all his life with  the  thought  that  he  is a revolutionary and
defends ideals near  to his heart, not  even suspecting the existence of the
GRU and its illegals. He is  so full of pride that  he has been selected for
such secret work that he  may not even tell  those who  think likewise about
it.
     There is one last method of recruiting. This is when a foreigner  comes
in and  says, 'Please recruit  me.' However  strange it may seem, every year
hundreds  of such  people  come into Soviet  embassies and  the same  answer
awaits  them all. This is a diplomatic  representation and  not an espionage
centre. Be so kind as to leave the building or we will call the police.' The
police are usually not called but the embassy staff chase the would-be agent
out quickly. Even if the GRU (and the KGB, for that matter) is sure that the
caller is not a young reporter anxious  to publish a sensational  article or
somebody  purporting to sell secret  documents but really only  selling some
nonsense, how  can they be sure that  the caller  is  not a police agent who
wants to know who in  the embassy is concerned with secrets? Thus the answer
to all is the  same. 'You  have got the wrong address.  We are not concerned
with  such things.' This  does not  mean that it would not be interesting to
have a look at what the  caller  has brought, but long experience has  shown
that the person who really wants to be recruited and really has something to
sell does  not say very much but  simply  hands  over the material, together
with instructions as to where he can be found, and  leaves. He  might  add a
note  to the effect that 'this is not all  the material I  have but  only  a
part, if you are interested.'
     Elementary psychological  analysis  shows that this is perhaps the only
way  to convince the GRU that they can trust the person. Indeed if a  person
has decided to entrust his life and the happiness of his family to such dark
and unknown personalities, why on earth should he not hand them some papers?
By  such a gesture he not  only draws attention to himself but he gives time
for reflection on his proposals and for the  necessary  checking with higher
authorities and checking  of the material. However,  if  the  visitor brings
papers and documents to the embassy and begins to demand immediate financial
reward,  this leads one to think,  'If, after  careful consideration, he has
decided on this step,  if he is really ready to entrust his life to us,  why
does he think that we would deceive him  and not  return the  papers if they
were of  no use to us? And  where is the guarantee that the papers  which he
has brought are not forgeries? Who would carry the  can if we paid him money
for papers which afterwards  turned  out to be  forgeries?  No,  we are  not
interested in such things.'
     That   these  'walk-ins'   are  an  extremely  unpredictable  form   of
recruitment is perhaps  best  illustrated  by  two examples, both  of  which
occurred at the same residency in West Germany. An American sergeant came to
one of  the Soviet  observation missions in West Germany (each of which is a
GRU residency), bringing with him the  block of a cipher machine used in one
of  the American  bases. The sergeant announced that for a  certain  sum  he
could bring a  second part of the machine and added that there could only be
a deal on condition that the GRU would  not subsequently attempt  to recruit
him. The residency immediately accepted both proposals. The sergeant got his
money and an assurance that  the GRU would forget all about him  immediately
after the deal was done.
     The cipher  machine  which was obtained, or  more accurately two of its
basic  blocks,  enabled  the  technical  services of  the  GRU  to  decipher
thousands  of  American  radio  communications which  had  been  intercepted
earlier but remained  undeciphered.  They  also enabled  them to  study  the
principles of cipher work  in  the American  Army and in  the  armies of its
allies and, by exploiting  the American principles,  to create more complete
Soviet  examples.  What  about the  sergeant?  Of  course he was immediately
recruited....
     On  another  occasion  a  couple  of  years  later  an  American  major
approached the same  Soviet residency  proposing to sell an  American atomic
artillery shell.  In proof of  his  good intentions  he handed over free  of
charge to the residency detailed plans of the atomic depots and instructions
on checking procedures and standing  orders for work with  atomic equipment.
These documents by themselves were of great value, although the major's main
proposal was of vastly  greater interest. The  major announced that he would
demand a substantial sum for  the shell, and imposed the  condition that the
Soviet side, having studied the shell, must return it after two months. Some
days later, the specialists of  the  GRU  information  service confirmed the
genuineness  and  very  great importance  of  the  documents which had  been
acquired. The GRU leadership decided to buy the atomic shell and to  pay the
price demanded for  it by the American.  A number of the senior officers  of
the residency were  called to  Moscow and given a  crash course in  American
atomic technology. A week later, on a dark rainy night in a clearing in  the
middle  of a  forest, two motor  cars met. In one was the American major, in
the other three operational officers. There were two more Soviet cars hidden
nearby, ready  to intervene if necessary. Many people did without sleep that
night. The  Soviet Consul dozed by his telephone, in full readiness to  come
tearing out to  the  wood and in the name  of the Union  of Soviet Socialist
Republics to  defend  the  military diplomats. On the  orders of the Central
Committee, many  highly placed officials in  the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Tass were also on alert. Of course  they did not  know what was going on
or where, but they were ready to announce to the world that the imperialists
had  mounted yet another provocation against the  Soviet Union. In fact, the
Tass and Ministry of Foreign  Affairs announcements  were already  prepared.
But everything went  according to plan. The American  and the  three Soviets
transferred the shell  from one car to the other,  and a  thorough check was
carried out. The operational officers knew beforehand the serial number, the
level  of radiation, the exact weight and the markings  which would identify
it  as a  genuine shell. All was  as it should be. The Soviets handed over a
briefcase  full  of  banknotes to the  American and agreed to  meet  in  two
months' time for the return  of the shell. Once the shell was in the  Soviet
car  with diplomatic  number  plates,  it was tantamount to being on  Soviet
territory. The police could stop the car, but they did not have the right to
search it nor  remove anything  from it.  Diplomatic  immunity is not to  be
trifled with. In the event nobody  stopped the  officers, and the  car drove
peacefully into the courtyard  of the  Soviet diplomatic  mission. Later the
shell was transported in  a  diplomatic container under  armed  guard to the
Soviet Union.
     The GRU chief joyfully informed the Central Committee of the successful
outcome  of  the operation.  'Where is  the  bomb?' asked  a  voice  on  the
telephone. 'We have it in GRU headquarters.' 'In Moscow!?' 'Yes.'
     A long and largely  unprintable tirade ensued, whose import was roughly
as follows: 'And what happens  if there is a little spring inside this shell
and it explodes  right in the middle of the Soviet capital  and turns Moscow
into Hiroshima?'
     The GRU had worked out  the  whole operation with the maximum number of
precautionary measures and the plan to acquire the  shell had been confirmed
by  all departments from  the chief to the  general  staff up to the Central
Committee. However, nobody had  foreseen the possibility that there could be
a timed device in the shell and  that the  Central Committee, the Politburo,
the  KGB, the  GRU, all the Ministers and  departments of State, the general
staff, all the Military  Academies, all the  principal design bureaux,  in a
word, everything  which  constitutes Soviet  power, could be instantaneously
destroyed. There  was no answer. No defence was possible. One shell  and the
whole  system  could  have gone  up, because  everybody  and  everything  is
controlled from Moscow. The  possibility of such an occurrence had only been
realised in  the Central Committee  when the shell  was  already in  Moscow.
Instead  of  the  expected  decoration, the GRU  chief  received  a 'service
incompetence note'  -  a  strong warning that  in the  future even  the most
trivial mistake would lead to dismissal.
     The shell was  taken for  the time being to the central aerodrome and a
military  transport aircraft speedily transported it  to  Novaya Zemlya. The
shell did not explode. At the same time there was no guarantee that it would
not explode  while it was  being dismantled  and destroy the leading  Soviet
specialists who  were working on it, so  the dismantling was conducted  in a
special  pavilion  hurriedly  constructed  on  the  atomic  testing  ground.
Preliminary work on the shell had already disquieted the Soviet specialists,
as  it was much more radioactive than it should have  been. After protracted
arguments  and  consultations, the shell was  dismantled with  the  greatest
possible care. Only then was it found that it was not a shell at all - but a
beautifully executed copy.
     The American major from the depot for atomic armaments had known to the
last detail how to do this. He had taken a written-off practice shell or, as
it is called, a 'standard weight equivalent', had painted it as a real shell
and put on a corresponding marking and number. Inside  the  shell he had put
some radioactive waste  which he had  obtained. Of course he was not able to
regulate this to the extent that the level of radiation would conform to the
level of  radiation of a genuine shell, but  this was not necessary.  At the
time  when it  was first  checked  after  having  been  handed over  to  the
operational officers, there had been no attempt to determine the exact level
of radioactivity. The officers had only been interested to see whether there
was radiation or not. After all that had happened the officers who had taken
part in the operation,  of course, received  no decorations but  at the same
time  they  were not  punished  and neither  was the  GRU chief. The Special
Commission  of the General Staff and Central  Committee established that the
forgery had been very  skilfully and thoroughly executed and that there  had
been little possibility of exposing it at the time of the hand-over. All the
same  the GRU was not happy about it.  It  began a search  for  the American
major. The first attempts  proved  unsuccessful. It was  established that he
had been posted to the USA immediately after the sale of the forgery, and it
would  not  be so  easy to find  him there.  He had apparently known of  the
imminence of his posting and chosen  his moment perfectly.  Steps were taken
to find  him in the United States, and at  the same  time the GRU  asked for
permission  to  murder  him from the Central Committee. However, the Central
Committee turned down the request on the basis that the major was incredibly
cunning and could well outwit the GRU a second time as he had outwitted them
earlier. They were ordered to forget about the major  and stop searching for
him.  Now, whenever a 'walk-in' appears at a Soviet embassy and suggests the
purchase  for an  exorbitant price  of  technical documents  of  exceptional
importance, GRU residents always remember the American major.
     That it  is  extremely difficult to find real  volunteers is  a  simple
fact. It is much, much harder to discover a volunteer than an agent whom the
GRU has spent  a year and more in processing.  But real  volunteers, however
warmly  they may be welcomed, do not take into consideration  another simple
thing. The Soviet operational  officer, having seen a great deal of the ugly
face of communism, very  frequently  feels the utmost repulsion to those who
sell themselves to it willingly. Even amongst those few who still believe in
communism,  the intelligence officer  will  make a great distinction between
the agent he has recruited by using a whole arsenal of tricks and traps, and
the volunteer.  And when  a  GRU or  KGB  officer decides to  break with his
criminal  organisation, something which fortunately happens quite often, the
first thing he will do is try to expose the hated volunteer.

     Chapter Five
     Agent Communications
     GRU  theoreticians  officially  admit  that  agent communications -that
complex of channels  for  transmitting  instructions  and material - is  the
weakest link in the chain. It is the fault of communications, they say, that
there are so many failures, and to some degree they are  right. Whatever the
theoreticians say, however, we in  the field know that  by  far the greatest
damage to  Soviet  intelligence is caused by the defection of  GRU officers.
Enormous damage was done when Igor Gusenko  went over to  the  West. By this
one gesture the whole powerful  current of technological intelligence on the
production of atomic  weapons, which was flowing like a river into the hands
of  Stalin  and his blood-thirsty clique,  was stopped dead. And  historians
will  remember  with gratitude the name of the  GRU Colonel Oleg  Penkovsky.
Thanks  to his priceless  information  the  Cuban crisis was not transformed
into a  last  World War.  Nevertheless,  it  is indisputable that  after the
phenomenon of willing and mass defection to the side of the enemy, which was
clearly   absent  in   the   old   Russian  intelligence   service   of  the
pre-revolutionary period, agent communications is the most vulnerable sector
of Soviet intelligence.
     All  agent communications are divided  into personal  and non-personal.
Personal contact  is  the most vulnerable element, and  preference is always
given  to  non-personal contact. At  the same  time,  in  the  first stages,
especially  during cultivation,  recruitment and vetting, personal  meetings
are an  inescapable evil with which one has to  come to terms.  Later on, as
agents  gain  experience  and  involvement in their work, personal  contacts
gradually give way to non-personal ones. Many of the most experienced agents
have not had  a personal meeting with their  case officer for several years.
If  such  meetings  are absolutely  unavoidable, the  GRU prefers that  they
should take place either on its own or on neutral territory.
     Routine  meetings are organised between agents, however. For example an
illegal will meet  his agent or  officers of  the undercover residency their
agents. The details for these meetings are worked out previously. Whoever is
the senior man  will give instructions to the junior as to where, when,  and
in what  circumstances they will meet. Experienced agents are often  given a
programme  of meetings for six  months  ahead, sometimes a year, and in some
cases even five years or more. Routine meetings usually take place in cafes,
restaurants, cinemas,  night clubs  or parks.  Both parties try to give  the
impression  that it  is  a normal meeting between ordinary people discussing
important  topics. Frequently they will try to give the impression that they
are collectors of such items as  postage stamps, postcards or coins and will
have these  objects spread out in front of  them in the restaurant  or  cafe
where they are  meeting. Sometimes these  meetings take  place in cinemas or
public conveniences. Longer meetings, especially during the vetting stage of
agents, will take  place in  hotels and camping places, caravans,  yachts or
boats which either are the property of the agent or are hired by him. In all
cases, and  this  also applies  to  other  operations involving agents,  GRU
officers will try to avoid city quarters  which are known to be the haunt of
criminals or prostitutes, and railway and police stations, airports, guarded
state  military or commercial undertakings - in other words all those places
where police activity may be expected to be at  its highest. The alternative
meeting is a carbon copy of the main meeting for which arrangements are made
at the same time  as the main meeting: 'If one of us should be unable to get
to the  meeting  we  will  meet in  the same  place in  a  week's  time'.  A
complicated  system  of alternative meetings  is  set  out  for  experienced
agents, and there may  be up to three or four alternative meetings  for each
main  meeting.  With so many alternatives it  is  essential  that places and
times are changed.
     This system of alternative meetings is introduced by GRU  officers long
before recruitment.  A man who has as yet done nothing for the GRU, who does
not even suspect its existence,  is already being indoctrinated into secrecy
and is  already  being introduced to  the  system  of  agent communications.
Usually  the subject  is  introduced  in  various quite  innocent ways;  for
example,  the officer says, 'I shall be very pleased to meet you again but I
simply  don't  know whether I shall  be  able  to be on time. The life  of a
diplomat contains so  many unexpected happenings.  If I  am late, then don't
wait for me more than ten minutes. In  any case we will meet again  in three
days' time.'  If you have a  good friend in  the Soviet embassy and he  says
that sort of thing to you, and at the same time has a hundred reasons why he
cannot  use the telephone in such a simple case, be  sure that the GRU has a
thick  file on  you and that sooner or later you will receive  a proposal of
recruitment  and notice  with  astonishment  that all ways  out seem  to  be
blocked.
     At the other  end of the spectrum there is the  emergency meeting. This
access is accorded  only to the most experienced agents, and  those who  may
communicate information  of  such outstanding  importance that  it brooks no
delay at all. The agent  is told how he should  go about calling the officer
on stipulated telephones or telegrams or signals. In  the same way the agent
is also given the possibility of communicating  danger. For example,  if  he
rings up on the  telephone  and says, 'I need John,' then  the officer  will
come immediately. If the agent says, 'Ring  John,' then they will reply that
he has made a mistake. If the  agent uses the second  variant,  then  he  is
showing  the GRU that he has been  arrested by the  police who are trying to
get to the case officer through the agent.
     Brush contacts are for  handing over  material, instructions, money and
so  on.  The  officer  and the  agent carry  out only one  contact,  in very
populous places, in the underground, on full  buses, at peak hours and  when
the crowds  come out of stadiums, for example. Brush contact must be carried
out with great precision otherwise the crowd may separate those taking part.
On  the  other hand  the  transmission  of the  material  must  not  attract
attention  especially   if   one  of   the  participants  is  under   strict
surveillance. The check meeting is carried out in the same conditions as the
routine  meeting.  However, the  most junior of those  taking part must  not
suspect  that it  is not  a  routine  meeting  and that  he is in fact being
checked. A number  of  GRU officers take up position before the meeting,  in
places where  they  can easily  observe what  is going  on (for  example, on
observation platforms for tourists  where there  are powerful binoculars and
telescopes installed). The  entry of  the  agent  to  the meeting  place  is
checked from  a great distance. They  check his punctuality, his  behaviour,
they  watch for  anybody  who follows him,  they observe the presence of any
suspicious  movement in the area of the meeting place prior to the  meeting.
After the agent has realised that nobody is going to come and  meet him, the
GRU  officers  may  observe what  he  does,  where he goes after the aborted
meeting and what action he takes.
     The secret rendezvous (Yavka)  is often confused with the secret  house
or Yavotchnaya Kvartira. At  the present time the term 'secret house' is not
used in the GRU. It  has been replaced by the  term  'secret flat' or KK but
the word Yavka is used to mean a meeting between two men  who are unknown to
each other, for example two illegals, or an agent with his new case officer.
The secret  rendezvous as an element of agent communications is given to all
agents  without  exception -  they are  given  the place, time,  recognition
signals, password and answer  - because the  secret rendezvous is  essential
for re-establishing lost contacts. For example, if in  extreme circumstances
the whole of the Soviet embassy  was declared persona non  grata  and had to
leave  the country, the agent who  had lost contact with  his  case  officer
would be obliged  to go to a certain place on the 31st of every month  which
has thirty-one days,  that  is seven times a year, having  previously agreed
recognition signals (brief case  in left  hand, book  in  right hand, and so
on). In the appointed place  another person will come  towards him and  will
give the previously arranged  password  to which the  agent gives the proper
reply. In giving the correct reply the agent shows to his new leader that he
has  not  made  a  mistake and  secondly  that  the agent  acknowledges  the
authority of his  new  case  officer.  If nobody  comes to the  pre-arranged
place,  the  agent is  obliged  to repeat the  process  until such  time  as
somebody does appear to re-establish contact.
     As  the agent  becomes more and  more involved in his work, elements of
non-personal contact gradually take the place of personal  contact. The most
experienced  agents have  only one element of personal contact - the  secret
rendezvous or  Yavka  -and several  elements of non-personal contact. Let us
examine these. First  there  is the long-range two-way radio link, generally
imagined  as  a special portable  radio set which  may transmit  information
directly to the receiving centre on Soviet territory or  to a Soviet ship or
satellite. This classical element in all spy films is in practice  only used
in  wartime. Instead  agents and  illegals  are  issued  with  small written
instructions  containing  several types of ordinary current components which
may be bought  in any radio  shop,  and  the means whereby they  may  be put
together to make a  long-range two-way set. This solves two  problems at the
same time. If an agent is  arrested there is only to be  found in his flat a
pair of good Japanese receivers, a tape recorder  and other components which
can  be  bought  in  any shop.  There is  therefore no  way that  he  can be
suspected  of  any  criminal  activity.  And  secondly  the  problem  of the
transportation  and  secret storage of  a  radio set of  comparatively large
proportions is  avoided.  The  GRU is  continually looking  at the market as
regards radio sets and components, and working out new recommendations as to
how they should  be assembled. In times of  war, however,  quick-acting  and
ultra-quick-acting  sets  are  used,  exploiting  technical  means of  radio
transmission  in  seconds   or  micro-  seconds.  Satellites  are   used  in
conjunction  with  these  sets  and  this  makes  it  possible  to  transmit
information  on  a  narrow radio beam  vertically  overhead. The  long-range
one-way radio link does not replace, but augments the two-way link. The most
convenient, reliable and secure type of link is inevitably the one by  which
the  agent  receives  from  the Centre.  One-way  radio  links  are  usually
broadcast by Soviet radio stations or special ships or  polar stations to be
received anywhere in the  world by ordinary radio receivers. Instructions to
the  agent  are  transmitted in  the form of  previously  agreed phrases  or
numbers in ordinary radio programmes, or as a simple numerical code. Even if
a police force should by some means  or  another guess that the transmission
they are hearing  is not a coded transmission  for  cosmonauts  or warships,
they cannot possibly determine for which  spy it is  destined, or even which
country. The  agent who hears such a transmission is also not exposed to any
great risk. However,  for  the  GRU it  is  often necessary  that the  agent
himself transmits. For this the short-range  radio  link  exists.  The agent
transmits  information  to  the  Soviet  embassy  with  the  help  of  small
transmitters, like the sort of walkie-talkie sets which can be bought in any
shop and which  are used for  guiding model aeroplanes and ships (one cannot
help noticing how many aerials there are on the roof of the Soviet embassy).
In this  type of  radio  exchange  the  GRU takes the  cover  of  a fireman,
ambulance  driver,  construction   worker   or   a   policeman.  All   radio
conversations  within  the  city   limits  are  thoroughly  studied  by  GRU
specialists  and any of  them  may be used by the GRU for  its dark  ends. A
short-range  special link  is an alternative to short-range  radio links. In
connection  with  increasing  the  monitoring  of  radio  exchanges, the GRU
frequently undertakes the transmission of signals under water. One fisherman
will transmit signals by means of a rod put in the water and another several
kilometres  distant  from him  will  receive  the signal by  using  the same
method. Or water  and gas  pipes can be  used. Significant research  is also
going on in the field of electro-optical communications.
     Dead-letter boxes are the favourite GRU means of contact. They have the
most  universal  application and  in addition  to communications they may be
used for  the  storage  of everything that  has to  do with  a spy's work  -
documents, money,  radio sets,  special photographic equipment, for example.
Thousands  of  types  of  dead-letter   boxes  are  known,  from  cracks  in
gravestones  and brickwork  to specially  devised magnetic 'letter boxes' in
the form of metal nuts. Applied to the structure of a bridge among thousands
of  similar nuts and rivets this device is easily hidden and just as easy to
undo.  The GRU  also makes wide  use  of  boxes constructed in the form of a
plastic  hollow wedge  with a lid. These can very easily be pushed into  the
ground in any public  park. Underwater  dead-letter boxes  are  also  widely
used.
     Their selection is  always a complicated  and responsible business. The
primary criterion  is  that  as  far as possible they must not  be  prone to
accidental discovery. They are  threatened by many possible happenings: they
may be found by children,  by the police, even by archaeologists. There  may
be floods, or the heat of summer may affect them. Someone may start building
on the site. All this must be taken into  account. Equally important is that
the dead-letter box's  location must be easy to  describe to another person,
even by  somebody who  only knows about it at  secondhand.  It  must also be
located  in  a  place where it is possible for the case officer to go at any
time  with a  plausible cover  story for  his  presence  there.  Some random
examples from GRU practice are worth describing.
     As a general principle of security, each dead-letter box (DLB) may only
be used once. Documents on all DLBs  are stored in the GRU command point and
after the completion  of a DLB operation  the document is stamped 'used' and
transferred to the archives. An officer at a command point, working in a GRU
top secret archive, once discovered the description of a  DLB on which there
was no 'used'  stamp. The document was  very old,  pre-war. The DLB has been
selected in 1932  and  three years  later some material had been put in it -
money  and  valuables  for the use  of the  illegal  residency  in  case  of
emergency,  apparently  'in  various currencies to  a total  sum  of  50,000
American dollars'.  The officer carefully inspected the  document again, but
there was nothing on  it to show that  the DLB had been emptied. The officer
informed his chief of what he had found and  he in his turn informed the GRU
chief, who decided on an investigation. The affair was not complicated and a
week later the investigation disclosed that the dead-letter box had belonged
to the Hamburg illegal residency which in  1937 had been recalled to  Moscow
lock, stock and  barrel for 'instructions',  and shot. All the materials  of
the residency had been handed in to the archives, together with the document
about the unused DLB. The new  officers who took the  place of those who had
been shot were completely inexperienced and  started  work with  new sets of
documents. There was no  time, in any case,  to look into the old documents.
Then the new  GRU  staff  was also liquidated.  So there were many documents
which were completely forgotten and simply collected dust in the archives.
     The  GRU  chief  took  two decisions, firstly,  to  nominate a group of
specially trusted officers  for permanent  archive work-  perhaps  something
else of interest might be discovered - and secondly, to give an order to one
of the GRU residencies in West Germany to find this old unused DLB.  Suppose
it was  still there.  If it was, then the value of its contents  would  have
increased many times.
     In fact the  DLB had survived, in spite  of the war, the fierce bombing
of  Hamburg,  the rebuilding  of the  city  after the war, and the  enormous
expansion  in  the  development  of  the  city.   The  DLB  consisted  of  a
hermetically sealed container, about the size of a small suitcase, which had
been buried at the bottom of a lake in a quiet park. For greater security it
had been  covered  with an old tombstone which  had been sprinkled all  over
with  sand and silt. The  container was removed to Moscow  and opened there.
Much  to the disappointment of all those present, all  that was inside was a
few dozen old-fashioned silver watches of very little value, a hundred or so
American dollars and  a few thousand  crisp German  Marks of the time of the
Third Reich.
     The  second  dead-letter  box was  in the very centre  of the  American
capital. At the beginning of his lunch break, the agent would go into a park
and  hide top secret documents in the hollow of a tree. Some minutes later a
Soviet 'diplomat' would appear,  remove the  documents and  with the help of
two other 'diplomats' copy them in his car which was  parked at the Capitol.
The  operation  was  an  especially  daring   one,  and   succeeded  several
times—after  the GRU  chief had sanctioned  repeated  use  of  the DLB.  The
copying of the  documents in the car did not take more than twenty  minutes,
and the agent, on his return from his lunch  break, was able to walk in  the
park for a few  minutes longer and retrieve his documents. One day the  case
officer  was  making his  way  towards  the  dead-letter  box.  Suddenly his
attention was attracted by a sheet  of  white  paper blowing about  with the
first yellow and  red leaves. The officer picked  it  up and, horrified, saw
the stamp 'top  secret'. He looked around. All over  the park were dozens of
similar sheets of paper. The  officer realised  that squirrels getting ready
for winter had taken up  residence in the  hollowed-out tree;  the pieces of
paper had got in their way and they had thrown them out. He  immediately set
about picking up the pieces, many of which were torn by the sharp  teeth and
claws of these lovable  little animals. At that dramatic moment  a policeman
appeared in  the park.  He evidently took the Soviet diplomat for one of the
White House  workers who had had his papers  blown  out of his hands by  the
wind. Without a word, the  policeman  also  started to  collect the  papers.
Having  gathered a considerable number, the  policeman  held them out to the
embarrassed  case  officer.  The  latter took them and smiled  in  the  most
foolish  way, even forgetting to thank his  saviour and helper, who  saluted
and withdrew. Nevertheless the situation remained highly critical. There was
absolutely  no  time, as the agent had already appeared on the opposite side
of  the park.  The  case  officer  hurried  to  meet him, although  this was
strictly  forbidden. Quickly outlining the situation, the  officer suggested
two possible ways out: either the agent should  tell his department that  he
had in error torn up the papers and thrown  them into the waste-paper basket
but then had remembered in time; or he should  wait for four days. The agent
chose the second option. Within hours, an officer with diplomatic  rank  had
made two changes  of aircraft in Europe and arrived  in  Warsaw where a fast
fighter interceptor was waiting for him. Again only hours later, the GRU had
carried out a complete forgery of the documents, and  a day  later they were
returned to the agent. Of course, all this time he  had been threatened with
exposure, but the GRU's swift action had saved him.
     A third dead-letter box was in a small drainage pipe  on the embankment
of  a river in  northern Europe. The officer had to  lower into  the pipe  a
small metal box  with  a  magnet  attached. The magnet was  very strong  and
normally  there  would have  been no risk that  the box would come  unstuck.
Pretending to tie up his shoe-lace, the officer carefully lowered the little
box into the drainage pipe  with the  magnet and took out his hand. But  the
first frosts had started and the officer had not taken into account the fact
that the interior of the pipe was  covered with a thin layer of ice. The box
slid down  the pipe, giving out a harmonious ringing noise, and after  a few
seconds flew out into the river, which was unfortunately also covered with a
thin sheet of ice. Had the river not been iced over, the box would have sunk
and that would have been that. But instead it skidded  on the ice  right  to
the middle of  the  river. The ice was too thin to walk on, and nor  was it,
possible  to throw  things at the box across the ice to send it to the other
side. In the box  was a film with instructions for  an agent. There was only
one way out. The officer ran into a shop and bought a fishing rod; then, for
an hour and a half, to the astonishment of passers-by, he cast his hook onto
the ice until it was taken by  the magnet. By carefully winding in his line,
he succeeded in retrieving the valuable box. This happened  in the  heart of
one of the Western capitals in broad daylight.
     Signals,  too, are a  means of  exchanging  information which is highly
favoured  by  the  GRU.  Office  pins  are  used  as  signals   stuck  in  a
predetermined  place,  dots, bands,  crosses,  signals are made with  chalk,
pencil, paints,  lipstick.  A  car parked in a pre-arranged  place at a pre-
arranged time may serve as a signal or a doll placed in a window of a house.
These are used as warnings of danger, requests for meetings, confirmation of
the reception of radio instructions and for hundreds of other intentions.
     Usually an agent who has  worked for some years with the GRU  will have
as a minimum the following elements of communication: the secret rendezvous,
long-range one-way radio link, short-range  radio line or special link and a
system  of  dead-letter boxes and signals.  An  agent  group in addition  is
obliged in every case to have a long-range two-way radio link.

     Chapter Six
     The Practice of Agent Work
     So  our agent  has been recruited, trained during long routine meetings
(perhaps in a small hotel off the beaten track), and there  has been  worked
out  for him  a complicated  system  of  agent communications including both
personal and non-personal forms of communication  and also the actions to be
taken  in case  of a sudden break of all channels of communication. Elements
of non-personal  communication  have  been  gradually  introduced  and  have
gradually superseded the personal meetings. In these meetings the agent  has
handed over  photocopies of secret documents  and  has received in  exchange
small sums of money. Attempts by the agent to protest or refuse to work have
been  successfully  suppressed.  The  material  received from him  has  been
thoroughly compared and checked with analogous material received from  other
sources. So far, all is going  well. What happens next is a  new  stage, the
thinking  behind which includes the segregation of the agent from the Soviet
embassy and from all meetings with official Soviet representatives.
     Up  till  the  Second  World War  not  only  the agents  of  undercover
residencies, but also illegals and agents subordinate to illegals, were tied
to the embassies. With the outbreak of war, when the embassies  were closed,
all  contact  with the powerful agent  network was lost. The  flow of  agent
information was cut off  at the very moment when  it would have been of  the
greatest value. The deputy head  of  the GRU  was sent  into occupied Europe
with several radio officers and unlimited powers. Within a short time he had
successfully organised a small  illegal resident network on the  territories
of Belgium and  Holland. Subsequently, by means of secret rendezvous, he was
able to re-establish contact with  all the illegal residencies. However, the
agent radio  station  by  the  name of 'Sever', which  had  been established
before  the war, proved useless. Nobody had supposed that the advance of the
Nazis  would be so precipitate, and the radio station  had not been designed
to deal with such long distances. The ships of the Soviet Baltic  fleet were
blockaded in  their  own bases  and could not be used for  the reception  of
agent transmissions.  Then the  GRU  organised  a  receiving centre  on  the
territory of the Soviet embassy in  Sweden. Information from all the illegal
residencies came  to  the  illegal  residency  network  and  from  there was
transmitted directly to the Soviet Union. This was perhaps the only possible
solution at the time and of course it had many  disadvantages. First of all,
the  agents, their case  officers and  the illegals  found themselves in one
gigantic residency, a state  of affairs  which  compromised many hundreds of
men. It could not be long before it collapsed, and the collapse began in the
most vulnerable  place, deep in the nerve centre of this  most unprecedently
powerful  underground  organisation.  One of  the  illegal  radio operators,
wishing to obtain the favours of a girl, boasted to her that he knew all the
latest news in the world,  as he regularly listened to the radio (which was,
of course, forbidden on occupied territory). The girl, in her turn eager for
the favours of a certain German corporal, informed him of this fact. So  the
most  powerful   underground   intelligence  organisation  in   history  was
discovered -  this organisation which had penetrated many  of Germany's most
sensitive secrets. Referred  to by the  Germans as 'the Red Orchestra',  the
organisation was completely neutralised and all  the  agents and illegals of
this gigantic octopus arrested.
     The  GRU  learnt its lessons very quickly. Already,  only a  few months
after  what  had  happened,  illegal  residencies were  functioning  on  the
territories  of  its true  'allies',  the United  States, Great Britain  and
Canada which were completely separate from the embassies. This now cast-iron
rule  is  observed  by the  GRU everywhere. Undercover  residencies  support
illegals,  but only on instructions from the Centre without having  any idea
for whom they are working.  All operations in support of illegals are worked
out  in such a way that the officers of the  GRU undercover residency do not
have one crumb of information which is not necessary. Operations are planned
in  such  a way  that  there  is no  possibility  of  the illegals  becoming
dependent on the actions of  the undercover residency. Another lesson learnt
from the arrest of  the 'Red Orchestra' is the division of  residencies into
even  smaller  independent  parts,  especially   insofar  as  this  concerns
illegals. And, thirdly and significantly, there is the  separation of agents
from the embassy which is our present concern.
     The  recruited,  tested  and trained agent must  be kept separate  from
official Soviet institutions abroad.  The process of separating the agent is
undertaken only  after he has handed over  to the GRU a significant quantity
of secret material, that is,  made  it  impossible for himself  to go to the
police.  The separated  agent comes in  three  guises: the  separated acting
agent, the agent group and the agent residency.
     The  most  valuable  agents,  those  that  provide specially  important
material, are taken out of  residencies very  quickly. The moment the Centre
feels that  such and such  an agent is handing over material  of exceptional
importance, it will immediately demand that no more information or documents
are  taken from him. All attention is switched  from questions  of obtaining
information to questions  of security  and training. The GRU will  then take
the  step of  sending him  immediately  to a  soft  country to  undergo  his
training there - during a 'holiday', perhaps. If  circumstances  permit,  he
may be transferred from the soft country to the Soviet Union. Thence he will
go back to his own country, but as an independently acting agent. He will be
run exclusively by the Centre,  in concrete  terms the  head of  a  section,
even,  in special cases, the  head of a directorate and in extreme cases the
deputy head of the GRU or the head himself. The running of  such an agent is
thus carried out exactly as the running of illegals is.
     A  complex system of non-personal communications and  contacts  must be
worked out for an independent  agent. Usually he will  transmit his material
by means of dead-letter boxes.  The residency  which was responsible for the
agent's recruitment may receive the  order to empty such and such a numbered
dead-letter box of films.  It  will not know from whom it is receiving these
films, whether from a local  illegal or a transiting illegal, an 'artist  on
tour'  as they  are still called, or from an agent who has been recruited by
that  particular residency.  The  processing  of  films  (which  are  called
schtchit - the Russian word for  shield) is carried out only  in the Centre.
The  film  will be  a dual-purpose one.  Firstly a pseudo-secret document is
photographed on the film by the GRU, then the film is given to the agent and
he photographs genuine  secret  material on  it. Any attempt to develop  the
film outside the walls of  the GRU  Technical Operations Scientific Research
Institute leads  to  the  real secret text  being  destroyed  and  only  the
pseudo-secret text appearing, which is designed to lead the police on a wild
goose chase.
     The  Scientific Research Institute of the  GRU has  done much important
work  in developing films of  the schtchit  type. Hundreds, or even possibly
thousands, of formulae have been worked out. In  each  case,  for  each  and
every valuable  agent, a separate and unrepeatable  formula is used. The GRU
tries by  all possible means to  limit the number of personal contacts  with
independent  agents, which  is why they are taken out of the residencies. If
personal meetings  have to take  place, they are only  carried  out  in soft
countries or secretly in the Soviet Union. In any case, they are carried out
extremely rarely.
     Other  agents recruited  by  residencies  are  gradually organised into
agent groups  of three to five  men  each. Usually,  agents  working  in one
particular field of  espionage are  put together in one  group.  Sometimes a
group  consists of agents who for various reasons are  known  to each other.
Let  us suppose that  one  agent recruits two  others. A group automatically
organises itself. The GRU obviously  considers family groups containing  the
head  of the family and his wife and children to be more secure and  stable.
The  members of  such  a group  may  work in completely different  fields of
espionage. The leader of an agent group is called a gropovod, and only he is
in contact  with Soviet officers. Thus  to a certain extent  the  members of
agent groups are completely isolated from Soviet diplomatic  representation.
The agent group is in contact with the undercover residency for  a period of
time, then gradually  the system of  contact with the residency comes  to an
end  and  orders  begin  to  be received directly  from  Moscow. By  various
channels the group sends it material directly to Moscow. Finally the contact
with  Moscow becomes  permanent and  stable and the  agent group is entirely
separated  from the  residency. With  gradual  changes in  personnel at  the
residency,  like   the  resident  himself,  the   cipher  officers  and  the
operational officers with whom there was once direct contact, nobody outside
the Centre will know of  the  existence  of this particular group. Should it
happen that  operating conditions become difficult,  or that the  embassy is
blockaded or closed down, the group will be able  to continue its activities
in the same way as before.
     The  GRU  tolerates  personal  contacts  with  group  leaders  only  in
exceptional  circumstances  and  where there is favourable security.  Agents
going into agent groups do not  by any means always know each other, nor  is
it necessary that  they should. They may  know the group  leader  alone, not
guessing at the existence of other agents.
     An  agent  group  may  gradually get  bigger as the group leader or his
recruiting agent continues to recruit other  agents. If the Centre permits a
group leader  to recruit agents  independently, his  agent group, even if it
consists of only two men, acquires the status of an agent residency, and the
group leader becomes the agent resident. This status was acquired by one  of
the  American nuclear  physicists  whom the  GRU  permitted  to  recruit his
colleagues at his discretion. Interestingly this agent resident never made a
mistake.
     Sometimes the GRU will post one or more illegals to an agent residency.
The presence of even one Soviet illegal (he  is of  course considered as the
leader)  in an  agent  residency  of any size automatically  transforms that
residency from an agent residency into an illegal residency. This process of
increasing  the numbers  and  the  gradual  self-generation  of  independent
organisations continues endlessly. The process is similar to the spread of a
fearful   illness,  with  the  difference  that,  in   this  case,  surgical
intervention  always  gives  excellent  results. Hundreds of  examples  have
proved this.
     If  the  GRU feels  that  there is likely to  be a clampdown  and  that
operating conditions will become more  difficult at  any  moment,  it  takes
measures to ensure that it does not lose the agent network which has already
been recruited but not as  yet separated from the undercover residency. With
this aim in mind some of the  most  experienced officers of  the  undercover
residency are in a  continual state of readiness  so that  at any moment, on
the order of the Centre, they may go over to illegal status and run the work
of their agents.  These  officers are  in possession of previously  prepared
documents  and equipment, and  gold, diamonds and other valuables which will
be of use  to  them  in their illegal  activities will have been  hidden  in
secret hiding-places beforehand. In case of war actually breaking out, these
officers  will  unobtrusively  disappear  from  their embassies.  The Soviet
government  will register  a protest  and will for  a  short time refuse  to
exchange its  diplomats for the diplomats of the aggressive country. Then it
will capitulate, the exchange will take place and the newly fledged illegals
will remain behind in safe houses and flats. Afterwards they will gradually,
by using  the system of secret  rendezvous, begin to establish the system of
contacts with agents and agent  groups which have recently been subordinated
to the undercover  residency. Now they all form a new illegal residency. The
new illegals never mix and never  enter  into contact with the old ones  who
have been working in  the country for  a long time.  This plainly makes life
more secure for both parties. The formation of new illegal residencies where
there were already old ones in action is yet another example of the constant
striving for duplication.
     However important the problems  of recruiting agents, training them and
organising  agent networks may be, there is still  one overriding objective:
the  acquisition of secrets  belonging to an enemy or  a probable enemy. The
material acquired  by the GRU breaks  down  into information, documents  and
specimens  or  samples.  Information  includes  commentaries   and  reports.
Documents are not  the subjective opinions or  observations  of  agents  but
official secret papers, books, drawings  or  copies of  them.  Specimens  or
samples  are  self-explanatory:   actual  weapons,   examples   of  military
technology, instruments  and equipment  which  the  GRU uses  for  study and
copying.
     The photographing of documents  and eavesdropping on  conversations are
in  real  life exactly as they are portrayed  in spy films. But how does the
agent  contrive to  steal secret equipment and remain undetected?  Many ways
and means exist: we have already examined one  of them when we discussed the
recruitment  of the  owners of  small  private  companies producing military
equipment.  The owner  of a small firm  has not much difficulty in producing
one extra  specimen of an instrument or a gadget and it is very advantageous
for  him to sell  it to the GRU.  But what about  really big objects  like a
tank,  an aeroplane  or an atomic reactor? Not only does one  have to obtain
such  an object without its  loss  being  noticed,  but  it  also  has to be
transported to the Soviet Union. There is, perhaps surprisingly, a number of
solutions to these problems. Samples of objects which can only  be used once
-rockets,  torpedoes,  shells,  cartridges   -  are  usually  stolen  during
instructional periods, military displays or tests. An entry may be made, for
example, in  the  official  accounting  documents  that there were a hundred
launchings  of a certain anti-tank rocket whereas in actual  fact there were
only ninety-nine. The  hundredth rocket  will  have been quietly sold to the
GRU without anybody  noticing. Very often written- off  equipment is able to
be sold because there exist  official  documents certifying that it has been
written off  or destroyed.  One agent suggested  to the  GRU that  he should
obtain  for them a lateral scanning radar for  aircraft  which permitted the
aircraft to carry out intelligence work on  the territory of the enemy while
it was  actually over its own  territory. The GRU, of course, agreed to  the
suggestion, although the agent said  that he  did  not know  exactly when he
would be  able to acquire the apparatus. It might be within a day or two, it
might  take years. The GRU  agreed to wait.  Several  months later the agent
obtained the apparatus, and a year later it was taken  into service with the
Soviet  Army. The agent worked in an experimental training  ground, and when
an  aircraft equipped  with  the required apparatus  crashed, the  agent, in
spite of very  strict  control,  was able to steal a  broken radar. This was
quite sufficient for the Soviet Army to catch  up with the United States  in
that particular field. Frequently agents go as far as  deliberately damaging
secret arms  and equipment  so that they can be written  off and  then sold.
Wide  use is made of  countries of  the  Third World which receive equipment
from  Western countries,  as  was made  clear in  the  GRU's  (unsuccessful)
attempt to acquire a French Mirage  III from the Lebanon. Any armed conflict
or  change of  government is  usually  accompanied by intense GRU  activity,
because this is the  most favourable time for  stealing military  technology
and armaments.
     The diplomatic  mail  is  the  most  often-used method of  transporting
specimens to the Soviet Union. The main problem is to transport the specimen
into  the Soviet embassy.  From that time onwards, of course, it crosses all
frontiers  in  sealed packing cases  and  accompanied  by  armed  diplomatic
couriers.  Sometimes the  difficult  problem arises  of a  specimen weighing
several  tons which cannot  be  accommodated in  the diplomatic  post.  This
happened when, in one of the countries which had bought Leopard tanks in the
Federal Republic  of Germany, GRU agents were  able to  steal a  written-off
tank engine  — an item of exceptional interest to Soviet industry. The theft
went unnoticed but  the engine  weighed more than a ton and there was no way
it could be accommodated in diplomatic containers. The Soviet consulate then
bought an old cruising yacht. The  yacht was straight  away sent for a refit
and, for  a  very substantial sum,  the small repair workshop installed  the
heavy  tank engine in  the yacht.  The yacht  went  to sea  on a  number  of
pleasure trips and during one such trip fortuitously met a Soviet trawler. A
special team of fitters literally tore the tank engine out of the yacht in a
few minutes. The yacht put to sea several times after  this to  maintain its
cover, before being sold.
     Another, more reliable method of  transporting heavy  equipment exists.
After  an  item has been acquired,  GRU officers  in the  guise  of a  trade
delegation will poach from a firm some completely unnecessary item  of quite
innocent nature. The important thing is that the quantity of  containers and
their   weight   approximate  to  the  packing  of   the  secret  equipment.
Subsequently  the markings on the packing  cases are  changed and they  make
their  way innocently  through  customs  control.  So items  of  exceptional
importance are transported to the Soviet Union in the form of equipment for,
say, a canning factory. Sometimes, too, specimens are sent to a safe address
in one of the Third  World countries where they  can  be loaded  onto Soviet
ships without any trouble.
     In  general  terms the  GRU leadership is quite confident  that  it  is
capable of obtaining any  technological secret from the West provided it has
been allocated  a  sufficient sum  of  money. Only one  technological secret
exists which  the GRU is incapable of obtaining. Even if it did  obtain  it,
the  Soviet  system  would not be able to copy it since for  that, the whole
structure of communism would have to  be  changed.  Yet  this  technological
secret is of vital importance to the Soviet system. It is the Achilles' heel
of socialism - strike at it and socialism will fall to pieces, all invasion,
nationalisation and collectivisation will cease. This secret is nothing more
than  the  means  of  producing  bread.  Socialism,  for  all  its  gigantic
resources,  is  not  capable of feeding itself. How easy it  would  be,  one
sometimes thinks, to place  an embargo  on the supply of bread to the Soviet
Union,  until  Soviet  forces   no  longer  found   themselves  in  occupied
Czechoslovakia, Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia, until such time as the Cubans
no longer held sway  in  Africa, until the Berlin Wall disappeared. It would
only  be necessary to withhold supplies of grain for a  few months, and  the
whole edifice of socialism might fall to pieces.

     Chapter Seven
     Operational Intelligence
     Operational intelligence  marks  a  complete departure from the kind we
have  talked  about   until  now.  It  embraces  intelligence  organisations
subordinated  to  operational  units  -  fronts, fleets, groups  of  forces,
military  districts,  armies,  flotillas  -  whose  job  is  to  aid  in the
implementation of the military activity.  Organisationally,  the Soviet Army
consists of sixteen military districts and four groups of forces in Germany,
Poland,  Czechoslovakia and Hungary. In war, or at the time of  preparations
for war, the groups  of forces  and military districts  are transformed into
fronts and army groups.  Each  military district, groups of forces and front
has a staff, each with its own intelligence directorate (called RU or Second
Directorate of the  Military  District  Staff).  The  chief  of  the  Second
Directorate of the Military District Staff  is the chief of all intelligence
units of the military district. He is officially called the head of military
district intelligence.  All  twenty heads of military  district intelligence
and  groups  of forces are  under  the command  of the head of the GRU Fifth
Directorate.  The  GRU  Fifth Directorate  supervises  the activity  of  the
intelligence  directorates, carries out the posting of  senior  officers  of
operational intelligence, collates the  work experience of  all  operational
intelligence and issues corresponding  recommendations and  instructions. In
addition,  the head of  intelligence  is subordinated  to  the chief of  the
military district staff. The  chief of staff  directs  the daily activity of
the head  of intelligence.  The head of intelligence of a military  district
works  exclusively in the  interests of his military district, in conformity
with  the  orders of  the chief of  staff  and the commander of the military
district. At the same time, all information obtained is forwarded to the GRU
too. The role the GRU plays  is  to  collect information from  all  heads of
intelligence and forward to  them information obtained by other intelligence
organs. Sometimes, the intelligence directorate of the military district may
work directly  in the interests of the GRU but this must be  done only  with
the agreement of  the military  district commander. The chief of the general
staff  is  the  supreme arbiter in disputes  between  the  commander  of the
military  district  and the  head  of  the GRU.  However, in  practice  such
disputes occur extremely rarely.
     Each front, group of forces and  military district consists of  armies.
Normally a front  has an air  force, a tank army  and two to three  all-arms
armies. Each army consists of four to seven  divisions. Sometimes a corps is
included - two to three divisions. Each army  and corps has  a staff,  among
whose members is an intelligence section which is called RO [Razvedyvatelnyi
otdel] or  Army Staff Second Department.  The  head of the army intelligence
section is the head of all intelligence units belonging to a given  army. He
also ranks below two other officers: the chief of staff of his army, and the
chief of intelligence of the military district.
     His relationship with his chiefs is based on  similar  lines. He  works
exclusively  in the  interests of his  army, obeying the orders of  the army
commander and  the army  chief of staff. At the  same time,  all information
acquired by  him is also forwarded to the intelligence chief of the military
district. A reciprocal arrangement exists whereby  the intelligence chief of
the military district forwards information to his heads of army intelligence
which  he has received from other  armies, the  intelligence directorates of
the military districts and the GRU.
     The Soviet navy  consists of four  fleets, the Northern, Pacific, Black
Sea  and Baltic  fleets. Each  of  the  fleets  is  the equal of  a military
district, group of forces,  and  front, and  has  a staff which includes  an
intelligence directorate or Naval Staff Second Directorate.  Its head is the
chief  of  Naval  Intelligence.  The   naval  directorates  have  the   same
organisation  as those in military districts,  fronts  and groups of forces.
The  difference  lies  in the fact  that  while  the army  directorates  are
subordinated directly to  the Fifth Directorate of  the GRU, the  four naval
directorates  fall under  an organisation called  naval intelligence. In its
turn naval intelligence comes under the head of the GRU and is controlled by
the Fifth Directorate. The reason for this extra organisational step is that
ships  of all four  fleets  frequently  operate  in  all  oceans as combined
squadrons. For  this reason the ships need information, not  about  a narrow
sector like the troops of a military district, but on a much wider scale.
     Naval  intelligence was created to  co-ordinate naval information  from
every ocean of the world, and is  a component of the High Staff of  the Navy
of the  USSR.  In  addition to  its  normal powerful apparatus for gathering
information, there  is  also the naval cosmic  intelligence  department. The
Soviet  Union  therefore  possesses  two  independent   cosmic  intelligence
organisations,   the  GRU's  own   and   the  Navy's   cosmic   intelligence
organisation.  Although naval cosmic intelligence works  in the interests of
the High  Commander of  the  Soviet Navy, all information from  it is handed
over to  the  GRU.  The  co-operation between  the  two  cosmic services  is
co-ordinated  by  the  chief of  the  General Staff.  Should  a very serious
situation arise, the same task may be set at the same time  to both services
and the results arrived at then collated and compared.
     The  organisation  of intelligence directorates  (RUs) on the staffs of
military districts, groups of forces, fronts and fleets is standardised. The
intelligence directorate consists of five departments and two groups:
     First Department or Department of Reconnaissance directs the activities
of the  reconnaissance units of the tactical  wing, that is,  reconnaissance
battalions of divisions and reconnaissance  companies of regiments. In naval
terminology this department is called the Ship Reconnaissance Department. It
directs  the collection  of  information which  comes directly  from serving
surface  vessels and submarines at sea, bearing in  mind that  what is meant
here are normal warships and not special intelligence collecting  ships. The
training of officers of First Departments is carried out in the intelligence
faculty of the Frunze Military Academy and the  corresponding faculty of the
Naval  Academy.  The officers of  First Departments are  usually experienced
army and navy  officers  who  have considerable  experience  of  service  in
reconnaissance units.
     Second Department or Department of Agent Intelligence is concerned with
the  recruitment  of  secret  agents  and  the  obtaining  through  them  of
intelligence information of interest to the staff. The recruitment of agents
and  the  creation of  agent networks is carried out on  the territories  of
contiguous countries where the military district concerned would  expect  to
operate  in war-time. Naval Intelligence is interested in recruiting  agents
from  all  territories,  especially in  large  ports  and  naval  bases.  An
intelligence centre and three or four  intelligence points are  subordinated
to the Second Department which is directly concerned with agent work.
     The  centre  is  concerned  with  the  recruitment  of  agents  in  the
contiguous  state,  whereas the intelligence points  only recruit  agents in
specific  sectors  and  areas.  They  work  independently from one  another,
although  they are  co-ordinated by the chief of the Second  Department. The
training  of officers for work in the Second Departments and also in centres
and points is carried out  by the Third Faculty  of the  Military-Diplomatic
Academy (the Academy of the Soviet Army).
     The  Third  Department or  Spetsnaz  Department  is concerned with  the
preparation  and  carrying out of diversionary acts  on enemy territory, the
liquidation of political and military  leaders, the destruction of lines  of
communication  and supply and the carrying  out of terrorist operations with
the aim  of  undermining the  enemy's will to continue  fighting. A Spetsnaz
intelligence  point is subordinated  to this department and this carries out
the recruitment  of agent-terrorists on the territory of any possible future
enemy. There is also a Spetsnaz brigade which  consists of 1,300 cut- throat
soldiers.  The officers who  work  in the Spetsnaz  intelligence  points and
those  who  direct  their  activities  in the Third  Department are trained,
rather  incongruously,  in  the  Third  Faculty  of the  Military-Diplomatic
Academy, although for  the Spetsnaz brigade and the officers  connected with
it training takes place in  the Frunze  Academy. Analogous organisations can
be seen in the Navy, with this difference: the  brigades are called Spetsnaz
naval brigades  (not  to be  confused with Naval infantry brigades) and  the
same 'diplomats' direct the activity of all agent- assassins in the fleets.
     The  Fourth  Department  or  Information  Department  carries  out  the
collection  and  collation of all intelligence coming into  the intelligence
directorate.
     The Fifth Department is occupied with electronic intelligence, and this
department directs two regiments,  the Radio  Intelligence  Regiment and the
Radio-Technical Intelligence Regiment.  Radio  Intelligence carries out  the
interception of radio signals  and Radio-Technical Intelligence is concerned
with tracking emissions from the enemy's radar.
     The  Intelligence  Directorate Technical  Facilities  Group is occupied
with the interpretation of air  photographs. The training of specialists for
such work is carried on at the Second Kharkov Higher  Military Aviation  and
Engineering School.
     The Interpreters' Group or 'the Inquisition' deals with the deciphering
and  translation  of  documents  obtained,  and with  the  interrogation  of
prisoners of  war. Specialists for  this group  are prepared at the Military
Institute (of Foreign Languages).
     The Intelligence Department of the Army Staff
     This  may be  seen as  an intelligence directorate in miniature. It has
very similar organisation: First Group or Reconnaissance Group: analagous to
the  First  Department  of an  Intelligence Directorate  and  concerned with
directing  tactical  reconnaissance, the difference being  that it  is  only
responsible  for the divisions of one army, whereas the  First Department of
an Intelligence Directorate is  responsible  for  all  the divisions  of its
military district; Second Group or Secret Intelligence Group; Third Group or
Spetsnaz Group: responsible for terrorist acts in the area of operations  of
its army - a specialist  company  of 115 cut-throat soldiers is part  of it;
Fourth  Group — Informational; Fifth Group  which  commands  two battalions,
radio  intelligence  and  radio-technical  intelligence   -the  Intelligence
Department likewise has its own interpreters.
     It would be a mistake to think that operational agent intelligence is a
kind  of second-class citizen  compared with  strategic intelligence.  Every
intelligence directorate is a kind of  GRU in miniature  with its electronic
facilities, information services, secret agents and even, where the fleet is
concerned, its  independent cosmic service. During  the  course of a war, or
immediately before war breaks out, the power of  an intelligence directorate
is  immeasurably  increased  by  the  infiltration in  the  enemy's rear  of
thousands   of  Spetsnaz  saboteurs.  The  intelligence  directorates  taken
altogether  form  a  very powerful  intelligence  conglomerate,  in  no  way
inferior in its  scope to strategic intelligence. In other words the GRU, in
the form of  strategic  and operational intelligence, has created  two agent
networks  independent  of  one another and each  duplicating the  other.  In
countries like Norway, Sweden,  West Germany,  Austria, Turkey,  Afghanistan
and  China  the  operational  intelligence  agent  network  by  far  exceeds
strategic  intelligence in strength, effectiveness and invulnerability. This
can  be  confirmed by  examining the  task  of  the  different  intelligence
directorates:
     Northern  Fleet  -  covering  Norway,  Great  Britain,  France,  Spain,
Portugal,  Canada  and  the USA.  There is  no  doubt  that  Northern  Fleet
intelligence is mainly restricted to targets  on the sea shore or coastline,
although  this certainly  does  not preclude deep  agent  penetration of the
whole territory  of the  country being investigated, including  the  central
government organs.
     Baltic Fleet - covering Sweden, Denmark, West Germany.
     Black  Sea  Fleet   -  covering  Turkey  and  the  whole  Mediterranean
coastline.
     Pacific  Fleet  -  covering the  USA,  Japan,  China,  Canada  and  all
countries of the Pacific Basin.
     Leningrad  Military  District - Norway  and Sweden. Agent  intelligence
work  is  not carried out on Finnish territory, since  this  country is well
inside the Soviet sphere of influence, and its behaviour pleases the Kremlin
much more than that of certain Warsaw pact countries, for example, Romania.
     Baltic Military District - Sweden, Denmark.
     Soviet  Groups of  Forces in Germany, the  Northern Group of Forces  in
Poland, the Byelorussian Military District  -  all  are concerned  with  the
study of the German Federal Republic.
     Central Group of Forces in Czechoslovakia - covering the German Federal
Republic and Austria.
     Southern Group of Forces in Hungary - Austria.
     Carpathian  Military  District  -  covering  Greece  and   Turkey  from
Bulgarian territory.
     Kiev and Odessa Military District - Turkey, Austria.
     Trans-Caucasian Military District — Turkey, Iran.
     Turkestan Military District - Iran, Afghanistan.
     Mid-Asian Military District - Afghanistan, China.
     Trans-Baikal and Far Eastern Military Districts - China.
     Moscow, Northern Caucasian, Volga, Ural and Siberian Military Districts
- these do not run agent networks in peace time.
     Taking two countries, West  Germany  and  Turkey,  as  examples, let us
analyse  the  strengths   and  facilities   of  strategic   and  operational
intelligence networks and likewise the KGB networks:
     West Germany has been infiltrated by: the GRU strategic agent  network;
several illegal residencies and agent groups; five undercover residencies in
Bonn and Cologne, and three Soviet-controlled  missions in British, American
and  French sectors; the Berlin direction of  the GRU; it is also covered by
the GRU operational  agent network. Here, completely independently,  work is
also carried out by the intelligence directorate of the Baltic Fleet, Soviet
troops in Germany,  and  the Northern and  Central  groups of forces  in the
Byelorussian  Military  District. In other words  West Germany is subject to
the attentions of: the agent networks of five intelligence  centres; fifteen
to  eighteen  intelligence points plus five intelligence points belonging to
the Spetsnaz  group;  five Spetsnaz brigades  and up  to  fifteen to  twenty
separate Spetsnaz  companies belonging to the same organisation which are at
full alert to  carry out terrorist acts  (the total number of cut-throats is
up to  8,000  men).  This accounts only for GRU  activities. The  KGB  agent
network also runs  several  illegal  residencies and  agent  groups  and two
undercover residencies in Bonn and Cologne.
     Turkey contains  a similar  proliferation  of  Soviet espionage:  a GRU
strategic  agent  network in  the  form  of an  illegal  residency  and  two
undercover residencies in  Ankara and Istanbul; a GRU operational network in
the  form of five intelligence centres belonging to  the Carpathian, Odessa,
Kiev  and Trans-Caucasian  Military  Districts,  and  the Black  Sea  fleet;
fifteen to  twenty  intelligence  points,  plus  five  Spetsnaz intelligence
points and a corresponding quantity of Spetsnaz brigades. The KGB provides a
strategic network  (one illegal residency and  two undercover  residencies);
and a  KGB operational  network.  This  network  is subordinated to the  KGB
frontier troops.
     These two  examples  provide  a blueprint for intelligence  activity in
many other  countries,  especially  those  having common frontiers  with the
Soviet Union or its satellites.
     The  basic  difference  in   working  methods   between  strategic  and
operational  intelligence  in  the  GRU  is  that  officers  of  operational
intelligence  do  not  in  peace-time  work  on  the  territories of  target
countries.  All  operations   concerning  the  identification  of   suitable
candidates, their vetting,  testing, recruitment, training and all practical
work  are  carried out on the territories within the  Eastern  bloc  or from
inside its frontiers.  It may  be thought that operational intelligence does
not have the range and  potential of  the strategic branch,  whose  officers
mainly  work  abroad,  but  this  is  not  so.  Without  the  possibility of
recruiting foreigners in their own countries, operational intelligence seeks
and  finds other ways  of establishing the necessary contacts.  Its officers
exploit every avenue of approach to  attract  foreigners visiting the Soviet
Union  and  its satellites into their  network. Prime  attention  is paid to
students undergoing instruction in Soviet higher educational institutes, and
to specialists visiting  the Soviet  Union  as members of delegations. Naval
intelligence  actively works  against  sailors from foreign ships calling at
Soviet ports, and operational  intelligence is equally careful  to study the
affairs of Soviet and  Eastern bloc citizens who have relatives in countries
of interest to it.
     Operational intelligence  is quite unceremonious in  using  methods  of
pressurising  its candidates,  seeing that the recruitment of foreigners  is
taking  place  on  its own territory.  Having recruited  one foreigner,  the
intelligence  directorate then  uses  him for selecting and recruiting other
candidates without a Soviet officer taking part. Frequently, one recruitment
on Soviet territory is  sufficient for  the agent who  has been recruited to
return  to  his country and recruit  several  more agents.  Contact  between
agents who have been recruited  and their case officers in the Soviet  Union
is usually  carried  out by  non-personal channels  - radio, secret writing,
microdots, dead-letter  boxes - and  couriers are greatly  used, too, people
like train drivers and conductors,  crew members of aircraft  and ships  and
lorry drivers. Personal contact with operational intelligence agents is only
carried out on Soviet  bloc territory. There  exist numerous  examples where
meetings with  agents take  place only once every  five to  seven years, and
cases  are  known  where agents have  never  met their case officer and have
never been either on Soviet or satellite territory. A useful example is that
of a lorry driver belonging to  a large transport company who was  recruited
by   Soviet   operational   intelligence  whilst  visiting   Czechoslovakia.
Subsequently, having returned to his own country, he recruited  a friend who
worked in an armaments factory and his brother who lived not far from a very
large military airport. The lorry  driver only  occasionally visited eastern
Europe and  rarely had contact with Soviet officers because there was always
a  driver's  mate with him. However, every time a  journey to eastern Europe
was  planned,  he  notified  his  case officers in  good  time by  means  of
postcards.  Postcards  with  pre-  arranged texts  were  sent  to  different
addresses  in  the Eastern  bloc  and every  time the  driver  crossed  into
Soviet-controlled territory,  officers met him either at customs, or  in the
restaurant or even the  lavatory, to  give him short instructions and money.
The  meetings were  carried out in  the shortest possible  time so that  the
driver's mate would not suspect anything.
     The absence  of contact with agents outside territory under the control
of   the  Soviet  Union  gives  GRU  operational   intelligence  exceptional
advantages. Firstly,  it  is extremely  difficult to unmask and  expose such
agents;  secondly,  and perhaps  more  important,  the  Soviet  officers  of
operational intelligence have no chance to defect to the West and expose the
activities  of the agents recruited by them. (In strategic intelligence this
occurs  quite regularly but  we have as yet not  one example of it happening
amongst operational intelligence officers.)
     Yet another important advantage  of  operational intelligence, and  one
which  gives  it  exceptional  invulnerability, is  its  diversification.  A
defecting  officer  from  strategic  intelligence can  say  a lot about  the
activities  of  the central  apparatus of the  GRU, but an  officer  of  the
operational  network  who did succeed in defecting would  be  able to reveal
only one or two intelligence points or centres - and there are  more than  a
hundred of these in the Soviet Army. Each of them is carefully isolated from
the others  and,  to  a  great  extent,  camouflaged. Centres and points are
mostly  found  on  the  premises  of  military   buildings  of   exceptional
importance, and consequently with  the maximum  possible protection. Even if
an officer did succeed in disclosing the true significance  of  a particular
building, he could only say that  it  was, for example, a store for  nuclear
weapons or a rocket depot;  it would be almost impossible  to determine that
in addition  there  was  also an  intelligence  point. Cases are known where
intelligence  points  have been  located on  the  premises  of the  personal
country  houses  of  important  generals  or  the  well-guarded premises  of
punishment   battalions   (in  other  words,  military   prisons).  And  the
diversification of the operational networks in no way  indicates the absence
of co-ordination. All these organs and organisations are included in a rigid
pyramid system  headed by  the Fifth  GRU  Directorate (in turn,  of course,
subject  to  the  head  of the GRU).  However,  in  the  activities  of  the
intelligence directorates there  exists a  certain  freedom which invariably
engenders  useful  intiative.  The  GRU  central apparatus  prefers  not  to
interfere  in the daily running  of  the intelligence directorates  provided
that  they  work  in  a  productive manner and toe the line.  The  GRU  will
occasionally  interfere,  in  cases where  two different  directorates  have
recruited  the  same agent,  although it will  always encourage a  situation
where different  intelligence  directorates  recruit  agents  for  the  same
target.  For example, the intelligence directorate of a group of forces once
recruited an agent for  an important scientific research target. Unwittingly
the intelligence directorate of another  group  of  forces recruited another
agent for the same target. Both agents provided almost identical information
which was eventually received in Moscow where it was carefully analysed. The
moment one of the agents began  to provide false information, it was spotted
by the Fifth Directorate which demanded that work should stop with one agent
and that there should be greater vigilance in the work with the other agent.
Independent penetration is,  as we know, practised at all levels in the GRU.
The head of an intelligence point may check his agents  and  reveal negative
aspects  in their work in  good time. The heads of intelligence  in military
districts check the  heads  of points and centres  and the head of  the  GRU
checks his heads of military district intelligence. An illegal agent network
may  be  used  to  check  the  agents  of  the  undercover  residencies  and
operational agent networks and vice-versa. Of course nobody suspects that he
is  engaged  in  checking somebody else. All anybody knows  is  that  he  is
procuring material for the GRU.
     Spetsnaz intelligence is the sharpest and most  effective weapon in the
hands  of the heads of intelligence directorates or departments. It consists
of two elements - Spetsnaz agents and  Spetsnaz detachments. Spetsnaz agents
are recruited by an intelligence point,  and the whole process of recruiting
and running agent-saboteurs is identical to the work with ordinary agents of
operational intelligence. However, their tasks  differ in essence. The basic
task of the procurement  agent is to provide necessary information. The task
of  the  Spetsnaz  agent  is  to  carry  out  terrorist  acts.  Intelligence
directorates try to  recruit  these  agents  from  within the most important
economic and transport targets. On receipt  of orders, they must be able and
willing  to  carry  out acts of sabotage upon these targets. For the GRU the
most important thing is to render unserviceable power and transport targets,
electric  power  stations,  electric  power  lines,  oil and  gas pipelines,
bridges, tunnels and railway equipment.  Great stress is placed on  carrying
out acts of sabotage  which  will have a strong  effect on the morale of the
inhabitants over  a wide area, such as the  blowing up of a large dam or the
burning of oil storage tanks. Spetsnaz agents  form the so-called 'sleeping'
agent network  which does no work in peace-time but springs into action  the
moment  hostilities  break out. Operational intelligence tries to limit  its
meetings with these agents to exceptional cases.
     The Spetsnaz detachment is quite different. It is the true elite of the
Soviet armed forces. Its members are crack soldiers  and officers. On Soviet
territory they wear the uniform of airborne troops, on satellite territories
they are  disguised as auxiliary  detachments, normally signals  units.  (Of
course they have  no connection  with  airborne  troops  or  signals.  Eight
divisions  of  airborne troops  are  subject  to  the  commander of airborne
forces, who in  his turn is answerable only to the Minister of Defence.  The
airborne forces form a strategic element acting exclusively in the interests
of the higher command.) Spetsnaz detachments are an organ of the operational
field and act in the interests of fronts, fleets and armies. The Soviet Army
includes four naval Spetsnaz  brigades (one to each fleet); sixteen Spetsnaz
brigades - one to each group of forces and the basic military districts; and
forty-one separate companies.
     A Spetsnaz  brigade consists  of a headquarters company, three or  four
airborne battalions and support detachments. In  all there are  900 to 1,300
soldiers and officers ready to carry out terrorist operations in the rear of
the enemy. A Spetsnaz naval  brigade  is similar,  containing a headquarters
company, a group of midget submarines, a battalion of  parachutists  and two
or three  battalions  of  frogmen. Sometimes  the Spetsnaz  naval brigade is
confused with the brigade of the fleet marine infantry, mainly because naval
Spetsnaz  use the uniform of marine infantry to disguise their  soldiers and
officers. Spetsnaz  companies in  armies and tank  armies  consist  of three
platoons  of saboteurs and one communications platoon. This means that,  all
told,  there are in peace-time  alone 27,000 to 30,000 first-class saboteurs
available. During mobilisation  this  number can be  increased  by four-  or
five-fold  by  recalling reservists  who  have previously  served  in  these
detachments.
     The deployment of saboteurs in the enemy's rear is normally carried out
by  parachute, though in the  fleets frogmen also take part. Spetsnaz hardly
ever  use  helicopters, because the deployment  generally takes  place  at a
considerable distance from the front line. Small groups of Spetsnaz brigades
are dropped at a depth of 500 to 1,000 kilometres to act in the interests of
the frontal forces who  will be attacking through areas  cleared  by  atomic
action,  air  attacks  and  sabotage  activities.  Simultaneously  with  the
dropping  of the  front  brigade,  each army taking  part  carries  out  the
dropping  of its  own  Spetsnaz companies. These are also dropped  in  small
groups, a maximum of  fifteen consisting  of five or six men each, at depths
of 100  to  500 kilometres.  There are usually  three or four armies and one
tank  army in each front, so in the course of  an attack at  a frontal level
there  are one brigade  and four or five separate companies  operating  at a
depth from 100 to 1,000 kilometres in the  rear of the enemy. In other words
around 250 groups totalling 1,500 to 1,700  men.  It must be added that,  on
West German territory for example, preparations are in hand for not one, but
four or five fronts to operate. At  the  same  time the  Spetsnaz agents are
activated.
     The Spetsnaz  detachments have two basic duties: the destruction of the
system  of the State  government and its armies, that is the  destruction of
staff,  command  points,  networks  and  lines  of  communication;  and  the
destruction of nuclear weapons and  the means of supplying them - attacks on
depots  and  stores  of  nuclear weaponry  and rockets,  aerodromes,  rocket
launchers and launching pads. Simultaneously with these two basic tasks, the
Spetsnaz detachments strive  to disorganise  the internal life  of the State
and Army and to sow uncertainty and panic.
     In carrying out the first  task, the leading role  is allocated to  the
staff companies of the Spetsnaz brigades. These companies differ  from other
detachments of Spetsnaz  in that they are  not  manned by  soldiers  who are
serving their time, but by professional men, 'ensigns'. These Spetsnaz staff
companies are  specially trained for  the kidnapping or destruction of State
leaders  of  the  enemy,  members of  the  government  and  senior  military
commanders.  Their  existence is  cloaked in  the  very  strictest  secrecy.
Frequently, many  officers and sergeants of Spetsnaz brigades  do  not  even
suspect  the existence of such  companies  in their  brigades. They are kept
apart  from the  normal  brigade and  camouflaged as  parachutists,  boxers,
wrestlers,  unarmed combat  experts, marksmen,  even  sports  teams  of  the
military district.  The  staff company  of the Spetsnaz brigade is the  only
unit which carries  out its tasks not in camouflaged uniform but in civilian
clothes or in the military  or police uniform  of the enemy. These companies
are also the only ones amongst the Spetsnaz detachments which, in the course
of  military  operations,  may establish  contact and act together  with the
agent-saboteurs of Spetsnaz. All the remaining units of saboteurs  undertake
night flights,  mine-laying and the seizure of prisoners  in order to obtain
information. Tanks and other  armoured fighting vehicles (AFVs) belonging to
the enemy  are of special interest for saboteurs,  and all  groups have  the
task of  making sudden  attacks on AFVs with  the aim of stealing  them  for
future use in attacks against given targets. Several groups may take part in
an attack on a  certain target, and after the attack  they will disperse and
go their own ways. There is a constant alternation between the collecting of
information and  the  carrying out  of  sabotage  acts. A  group may collect
information  on enemy troop  movements in a certain  region and transmit the
information to its staff, then it may destroy  a rocket launcher  in another
area, then go on to collect more  information on troop movements. Everything
depends on the tasks  set  to  the group and  the  initiative  of  the group
commander. When prisoners are taken, the saboteurs  know no laws or humanity
in their  methods of interrogation; nobody who has been in any way connected
with  Spetsnaz will deny their  brutality, which extends even  to  their own
members,  because speed of results is paramount.  They  will  kill their own
wounded -the group cannot transport a  wounded man, nor  can it let him fall
into the hands  of  the  enemy.  And  if a rocket  launcher  or an  aircraft
carrying nuclear weapons is ready for action, they will attack it even if it
means the inevitable destruction of the entire group.
     Let  us examine one case study which underlines both the importance and
effectiveness  of operational  intelligence. The  greatest  interest for the
staff of military districts is not the political situation or technology but
pure military information: the deployment, numbers, equipment  and  plans of
the  troops of a probable enemy in sectors where an attack by  Soviet forces
is likely. An agent who had been  recruited by  the second department of the
intelligence  directorate  of  the  Byelorussian  Military  District on West
German  territory  selected places  for  parachute landings by  the Spetsnaz
groups. He photographed these locations and made diagrams.  Obviously, since
the prime motive was sabotage, his choices were near important bridges, dams
and  narrow passes in lakeland areas. His photographs  were  transported  by
courier  into  East  Germany  to  one  of  the intelligence  points  of  the
Byelorussian  Military  District.  Copies  were also sent  to  the third and
fourth  departments  of  the  Byelorussian  Military  District  intelligence
directorate. While they were being studied, an  officer noticed  a  group of
American soldiers who kept on appearing in close-up. The soldiers were doing
something  at  a kind  of  metal hatchway on the  side of the road,  and the
suggestion  was put forward that  they  were  laying a  cable  for  military
communications.  This was  scotched by officers of  the fifth department who
had  been invited for  consultations  and  who said categorically  that  the
Americans would not have  a  cable  in that region. The  laying of  military
cable on West German territory would in any case be discovered by  agents of
the  military  district.  In  the  opinion  of  the  signals  officers,  the
photographs showed that the soldiers' work was unlikely to be concerned with
cables. The photographs  were immediately  dispatched to the GRU information
service,  where a  new  suggestion  was put  forward.  Could  these  not  be
anti-personnel  land mines which are  prepared  in  peace-time  where Soviet
sabotage units might be active in the event of war? This suggestion  greatly
alarmed the GRU leadership. The fifth directorate immediately gave orders to
all  intelligence  directorates  running  agents  in  West  Germany  to  pay
particular  attention to  the activities of small groups of soldiers  in the
neighbourhood of important bridges,  dams,  railway stations and crossroads.
At the same time, the first GRU directorate gave similar orders to  all  its
residents in West Germany. A month later, the information service of the GRU
had  at its disposal thousands of photographs of groups  of soldiers working
at metallic hatchways. Every hatchway that had been discovered was marked on
a map. This  alone did not permit a final  conclusion to  be drawn about the
significance of  the hatchways, and  the GRU had  a series  of  enlargements
taken  from  a  distance  of  not more  than  one  metre.  The  photographic
interpreters  were interested to see that the thickness of the hatchways was
no greater than that of  the wall of a good safe,  but the locks would  have
been the envy  of any bank. This led to the opinion that the land mines were
of a more complicated design.  Further analysis showed  that the mine-shafts
were very deep, and  sometimes  placed  at some hundreds  of metres from the
object which they were supposed to destroy in case of war. It was this which
finally convinced the specialists that  it was not a  case of ordinary  land
mines, but  of  a  nuclear  variety,  whose  purpose  was  not to  counter a
parachute attack but to halt all Soviet troops in case  they began an attack
on  Europe.  Simultaneously,  one  of  the GRU  residencies  on West  German
territory acquired documentary evidence  confirming the  conclusions  of the
information service.
     The  possibility  of nuclear land mines being used completely disrupted
all  Soviet plans for a blitzkrieg attack on Europe. The general staff,  the
Ministry of Defence and the  Central Committee  would now  have  to find new
ways  of attack, new methods of employing their troops and ways and means of
surmounting strong radioactive fallout caused by the underground explosions.
In  a  word, all tactics, operational methods and strategic plans would have
to be changed. All this was thanks to the fact that the new NATO tactics had
become known to the general staff in good time.

     Chapter Eight
     Tactical Reconnaissance
     There  is  yet  another level to the practice of military intelligence.
Intelligence organs and detachments subject to tactical units and formations
of  divisional  strength  and  below,   which   facilitate  their   military
operations,  come  under  the  heading  of  tactical  reconnaissance.  Their
activities  are under the full control of operational intelligence, which of
course comes under the control of the GRU central apparatus. So all tactical
reconnaissance  organs  have,  in  exactly  the  same   way  as  operational
intelligence organs, a twofold  subordination. The head of reconnaissance of
a  division  is  subordinated  to  the  chief  of  army  intelligence,  more
accurately the first group of the Army Intelligence Department. The chief of
regimental reconnaissance is  subordinate to the regimental  chief of  staff
and the chief of divisional  reconnaissance.  Each motorised-rifle and  tank
division has on its strength  an independent reconnaissance  battalion.  The
word 'independent'  shows that  the  battalion  does  not  form part  of the
regiment but is directly  subject to the divisional staff. Each of the  four
motorised-rifle and  tank  regiments on the  strength of a  division  has  a
reconnaissance  company.  Reconnaissance companies  are  controlled  by  the
regimental reconnaissance  chiefs.  Artillery  and  anti-  aircraft  missile
regiments are  not  included as  their  reconnaissance  detachments  are not
active in the enemy's rear.
     A  divisional  independent  reconnaissance  battalion  consists   of  a
headquarters, a deep reconnaissance company, two reconnaissance companies, a
company electronic reconnaissance and auxiliary services.
     Deep Reconnaissance
     The deep reconnaissance company is the smallest but the best of all the
companies and batteries of the division. There are twenty-seven  men  in the
company including six officers and an ensign. It has a small headquarters of
the commander  and a sergeant-major, and five reconnaissance  groups of four
men, each with  an officer at its  head. There is a total of six jeeps, each
group having one and one for the commander.
     The company's task is to discover and destroy enemy rocket launchers in
its divisional sector.  Deep  reconnaissance  groups  are  deployed  in  the
enemy's rear by helicopter, either with or without their jeeps, to depths of
from thirty to 100 kilometres.
     On  discovering an  enemy  rocket installation, the  group  immediately
reports it to the staff. Should the rocket be ready for launching, the group
must attack it. However, unlike the Spetsnaz groups, the group will not kill
its  wounded unless  the action  is on foot - a rare  occurrence.  The  deep
reconnaissance company may also be called upon to kidnap  staff officers and
to hunt for  their  staffs,  but only  in cases  where  the commander  of  a
division  is certain  that  there are  no  enemy nuclear  facilities in  his
divisional sector.
     The  Reconnaissance  Companies  of the Battalion  have  exactly similar
organisation.  In each company there  are  three tanks, seven reconnaissance
vehicles and ten motorcycles.
     The  Electronic  Reconnaissance Companies have eighty  men  and  thirty
vehicles  with electronic equipment. The company operates  only from its own
territory.  Among  its   tasks  are   intercepting  and  deciphering   radio
conversations  of the  enemy, taking bearings on  radio stations  and  radio
locators, and monitoring the  extent  to  which its own side  observes radio
security regulations.
     Each motor-rifle and tank regiment has its own  reconnaissance company.
Regimental companies operate at a depth of up to fifty kilometres as against
the  battalion company's operation to eighty kilometres. All these companies
penetrate enemy territory under their  own power, using gaps  in the enemy's
defence. The basic method of obtaining information  is the capture and cruel
interrogation of prisoners.
     The Soviet army has approximately 180  motor-rifle and tank  divisions.
Many  of  these,  especially those deployed in the rear, are under strength.
Undermanning is never  allowed,  however,  in  the  case  of  reconnaissance
detachments.  There is  about the same number of  independent reconnaissance
battalions,   and  there  are  also  about  700   regimental  reconnaissance
companies.  In other words there are about 95,000  men  directly  under  GRU
command in tactical  reconnaissance. We have not included in this number the
strength  of  chemical, engineering  and  artillery reconnaissance companies
independent of these.

     Chapter Nine
     The Training and Privileges of Personnel
     These are the educational institutions which  take part in the training
of personnel for  Soviet military intelligence: the Intelligence  Faculty at
the  General Staff Academy; the Training Centre of Illegals;  the  Military-
Diplomatic  Academy;  the  Reconnaissance  Faculty  of the  Frunze  Military
Academy;  the  Reconnaissance  Faculty  of  the Naval  Academy; the  Special
Faculty of the Military Signals Academy; the  Military Institute  of Foreign
Languages;  the  Cherepovetski   Higher  Military  Engineering  School   for
Communications; the  Special Faculty of the Higher Military Naval  School of
Radio  Electronics;  the  Spetsnaz Faculty  of  the Ryazan  Higher Parachute
School;  the Reconnaissance  Faculty  of  the  Kiev Higher Military  Command
School;  and  the  Special Faculty  of  the  Second Kharkov Higher  Military
Aviation and Engineering School.
     This  list  gives  an impression  of  the  extent  of the  training  of
specialists for the GRU system. Some of these educational establishments are
devoted exclusively to  this work, others have only one faculty. However, in
any case, we are talking of many thousands of first-class specialists who go
into military intelligence every year. All the higher military schools  give
instruction  at  university  level  to  their  students.  The best  of these
subsequently  enter   the   academies  which  provide  a  second  university
education.
     Students   entering   the   Soviet  Army's   higher  military  training
establishments undergo  a period of instruction which lasts for four to five
years.  The minimum age  is seventeen, maximum twenty-four. Candidates  must
have finished  secondary  education  and  be  of  normal mental and physical
development with  a  suitable  ideological background. They  sit an entrance
examination and  are interviewed by  a medical  commission; they then take a
competitive  examination. The vast majority of them have no idea of the true
character of the educational establishment they  have chosen. In some cases,
the name of the school gives a reasonably exact idea of the subjects studied
in it. The Ulyanov  Guards Higher Tank Command School leaves  little  to the
imagination. But  what does  a  name  like the Serpukhovski  Higher  Command
Engineering School  tell us? If a candidate chooses it,  he may be surprised
to find himself learning about strategic missile troops. Signals schools are
largely the  same - the candidate  has  little idea of exactly what subjects
are  studied  there. He  selects one of them, the Cherepovetski school, say,
and finds himself in  strategic intelligence. The point is that  there is no
choice.
     Graduates of higher command schools receive the rank  of lieutenant and
a university diploma on graduating. Graduates of higher military engineering
schools receive the rank of engineer lieutenant and an engineering  diploma.
After graduation, the officer is posted to a unit on the instructions of the
General Staff,  and  from the first  day  of his service his fight  with his
fellow officers for the right of entry to the academy begins. The academy is
the passport to the higher echelons of the Army. Without passing through the
academy, the officer may serve on until major or lieutenant-colonel level at
the most. Success in the academy opens wide horizons and  speeds up progress
on the promotion ladder. The officer may submit his first application to the
academy after three years of service. The application  is confirmed at every
level  of  command,  beginning  with  his  immediate  superior.  Any  higher
commander may hold up the application under any pretext: that the officer is
too young;  too old; too stupid;  or too clever. In  which case the  officer
will put off his application until the next  year ... and the next year, and
so on possibly for all his twenty-five years of service.
     There are more than fifteen military academies in the Soviet Army,  but
for most officers it  does not  matter which one he gets into. The important
thing is  to get into one of them.  If his commanders decide that an officer
is suitable, he must still pass examinations and undergo a rigorous entrance
competition. The  period  of  study at all the academies is three years, and
they are all  similar bar one, the  General Staff Academy. To enter it there
is no competition and no examinations, nor are there applications for entry.
Candidates are selected by the Central Committee from the number of the most
successful  and   dedicated  colonels  and  generals  up  to  and  including
colonel-general,  who  have  already completed  their study  at  one of  the
military academies.
     The General Staff Academy is the passport to the very highest levels of
Soviet military leadership. The colonel or general continues  to  serve  and
never  suspects that  he may  suddenly receive from the Central Committee an
invitation to attend yet a third spell of  university education. The General
Staff Academy is the highest dream of the most eager careerists.
     Let us examine the progress of an intelligence officer on the promotion
ladder. As a graduate of the intelligence faculty of the Kiev Higher Command
School,  for example, he will be posted to the command of  a  reconnaissance
detachment of a regiment  or  division. Here  begins  the officer's  gradual
upward movement  on the  service  ladder,  from platoon commander to company
commander to commander of regimental reconnaissance and deputy  commander of
reconnaissance battalions. To secure further promotion, the officer must now
enter  the reconnaissance faculty  of the Frunze military academy. This same
faculty  is  also  open to graduates of the  Spetsnaz faculty of the  Ryazan
Higher Parachute  School. All officers study there together and  then return
to their own units, only this time with a higher command.
     So  far  all  this is  straightforward,  provided  that  the  officer's
superiors co- operate in signing the necessary documents. But one institute,
the Military Institute instructing in foreign languages, is rather peculiar.
This is a privileged establishment for  the children of the highest echelons
of  the Soviet Army. The Institute exists on the  same basis as the Military
Academy, although young people enter it according to the rules laid down for
military schools. This means, in fact, that a candidate's father has only to
worry about placing his little son on the first rung of the  military ladder
and the ladder itself will move upwards.
     The  period of  study in  the institute is  from five  to  seven  years
depending  on the  faculty. The student  receives education  to the level of
that of the military  school and the  rank  of  lieutenant; he then proceeds
with his training as he would in a  normal military academy. That is to say,
these  scions of the military  aristocracy are spared the rigours of genuine
military service as well as  the cruel competition between officers  for the
right of entry to a military academy. Everything proceeds automatically.
     The Institute is not only a stepping-stone to the  highest Army  ranks,
but  to the  highest ranks of the KGB too. The conditions of  acceptance are
naturally graded according to rank: for the children of colonel-generals and
higher, there  are  no examinations;  the  children  of  lieutenant-generals
undergo  a  very cursory  examination;  and the  children  of major-generals
undergo the  most  rigorous  examination.  However, in order  to soften this
clear class  distinction, the Institute every year accepts  a ten  per  cent
intake of 'non-aristocrats', sons of colonels and  majors, sometimes even of
workers and kolkhozniks.
     Discipline  and competition are fearsome. Should any student commit the
slightest offence, he is speedily expelled from the  Institute in  disgrace.
But  there is a deeply-entrenched  set  of  privileges too. For the  sons of
lieutenant-generals, and colonel-generals even more so, the special entrance
provides  for  the appointment  of  individual  tutors  and  the  taking  of
examinations  privately at home, so that the candidate does not get nervous.
For colonel-generals  and above, there exists the privilege of being able to
send  not only  their sons to the  Institute, but also their  daughters, who
constitute a special little group. The girls are given instruction in French
for  the  sake  of  prestige and  in English for obvious commercial reasons.
They, together with everybody else,  receive officer's rank. They  will find
their way into the Ministry of Defence.
     After  the  Institute's  final  examinations,  interested organisations
carry out their selection of the  graduates. The first selection  is carried
out by the KGB and the GRU  according to the principle of 'one for you,  one
for me'. There is no friction, firstly because the system has been laid down
for many years and secondly because KGB and GRU have different interests.
     The KGB is quite happy to choose the sons of  high-ranking, serving KGB
officers, but the GRU devotes  its attentions largely to the proletarian ten
per cent. For  two principal  reasons the  GRU has had  a long-standing rule
that  it  will   not   admit  the  sons  of  high-placed  parents  into  its
organisation, nor  will it admit children of GRU officers whatever post they
occupy. Only  after a father retires from the GRU can his son be  considered
for  admission. The reasoning goes that if  a son  is refused something  the
father may refuse the same thing to all his subordinates. Secondly, there is
no father who really wants to risk his own career by linking it with that of
a son who is on agent work and to whom anything could happen. This principle
of  the  GRU's has  to a  very  great extent  eradicated  corruption  in the
selection of officers, although corruption flourishes in other GRU fields of
activity. (The KGB has adopted  diametrically opposed principles. Everywhere
within it  are  the  children  of Tchekists,  frequently  under  the  direct
supervision  of  their  fathers.  This is justified by  the false  notion of
handing down traditions from father to son.)
<ul><a name=19></a><h2>x x x</h2></ul>
     The unclassified name of the institution is 'military  unit 35576'. Its
secret designation is the Soviet Army Academy. Its top secret designation is
the Military-Diplomatic  Academy  of  the  Soviet  Army.  Regardless of  the
abundance  of  names, none gives any  idea  of  what  is  studied  there. If
somebody wanted to convey an idea of its activities by means of a name, then
that  name  would most probably  be something  like the Military  Academy of
Agent  Intelligence. Very  few people  inside the  Soviet Union  know of the
existence  of this academy, and should any  officer ever hear a rumour about
it, and write an application to enter it, immediate  enquiries would be made
to establish  the source  of  the  information. One may  rest assured that a
culprit would be found and put  in prison for  spreading government secrets.
For spreading  a secret like  the existence of  the Soviet Army Academy  the
sentence is ten years in prison, perhaps fifteen, perhaps even the 'ultimate
sanction'. Those connected with the Academy understand this rule and obey it
enthusiastically.
     The GRU seeks out candidates for the Academy and  secretly suggests  to
officers that they should enter. Before making  this proposal to an officer,
the officer will  of course have been very carefully checked out by the GRU,
who must not only be  certain that  he will agree but will also have obliged
him  to  sign a  document about the  divulging  of military secrets. In this
document are described all the unpleasant things which await him,  should he
decide to share his secrets with anybody else. However, they do not tell him
any secrets. They simply tell him that there  exists a certain academy which
is keen to  welcome  him  as a student. To  his question  as to what sort of
studies  he will undergo,  he receives the  answer that  the  work  is  very
interesting.  There will be no soldiers  and  no hierarchy  of rank, and the
conditions of life are  vastly better  than those of any  other organisation
known to him.
     At the  outset  this  is all they will entrust  to  him. The GRU  holds
nobody against his will and is perfectly frank about  future privileges. For
the  GRU officer who completes the  Academy, success is assured -  unless he
makes a  mistake, in which case retribution is equally swift. He may  either
be  deprived  of overseas  work and be  sent instead  to work in the central
organs of the  GRU in Moscow; he may be deprived of work in the GRU and sent
back to the Army; and finally, he may be shot. All of these punishments, not
only the last, are regarded as harsh in the extreme. The first means the end
of overseas life, and GRU officers are envious even of dustmen overseas. The
second means an end  to privilege and the sweet life within  the GRU, and  a
return to the grindstone of life as an ordinary Soviet officer. The third is
only marginally worse.
     The Soviet Army Academy  is located in Moscow  on  Narodnogo Opolchenia
Street, but many of its secret branches are  scattered  all over  the  place
disguised as innocent offices, flats or hotels. The central building reminds
one of  an  elegant  museum  with  its Greek  colonnade  and  richly  carved
ornamentation.  Around  it  are  several  large buildings, and the  whole is
surrounded  by a very  high iron  lattice-work  fence. The  area wallows  in
greenery  so that nothing can be seen. There  are no  name plates or  number
plates on the building. From the outside there is little to indicate that it
is secret. Only  sometimes on the upper storeys  and  in certain windows can
one  see grilles and  casements covered  in  cord  nets, an  indication that
within those rooms there is work on top secret documents being  carried out.
The string nets are so that  no  pieces of  paper can be blown  out  of  the
windows by draughts.
     The Academy is an integral  part of the  GRU. The chief  of the Academy
has  the military rank of colonel-general and is  a  deputy head of the GRU,
not of course first deputy head. The chief  of the Academy has four deputies
who are lieutenant-generals beneath him. These are the first  deputy and the
deputies for the political, administrative-technical and academic sections.
     The first deputy is  in charge of  the graduate school,  four faculties
and academic courses. The political  deputy  is responsible for the state of
political  awareness and  the morale  of all officers of  the  Academy.  The
administrative-technical deputy is responsible  for the personnel department
and the security department (with the commandant's  office and a company  of
security   guards)  together  with  the   finance,  stores   and   transport
departments. Under  him there are also the libraries, including  collections
of secret and top secret literature. The deputy for the academic section has
under him  the  academic  sub-faculties which are headed by  major-generals.
These  sub-faculties  are  strategic  agent  intelligence, operational agent
intelligence and Spetsnaz (dealing with the armed forces of likely enemies),
strategic and  operational trade-craft of the Soviet Army, foreign languages
and study of  countries, history  of international relations  and diplomatic
practice and, finally, Marxist-Leninist philosophy.
     The  first and second faculties  prepare their students for the central
GRU  apparatus. However,  the first faculty  is called the  Special Services
Faculty and the second the Military-Diplomatic Faculty, and it is officially
considered that  the  first faculty  prepares officers  for civilian cover —
embassies, civil airlines, merchant navy,  trade representations - while the
second faculty prepares its  students for military cover.  But we must again
remember that Soviet military attaches are the  same GRU  officers as  those
who work  under civil  cover. They  face  the  same tasks  and use  the same
methods as all other officers of  the GRU. For this reason the instructional
programme in  both  faculties  is  absolutely  identical.  Furthermore, when
students  have  completed their  studies, in  whichever of the two faculties
that  might  be, the GRU will  post  them under whatever cover they consider
suitable. Many of the officers who have studied in  the first  faculty  will
find  themselves working  in  military  organisations and  vice- versa.  The
artificial  distinction exists in order  to further  the following aims:  to
confuse Western intelligence services and to create the illusion that  there
is  some  difference  between military attaches and other  GRU officers;  to
segregate the  students for  security reasons (a  defector will not know all
his fellow  students,  only half - with this in  mind the  first faculty  is
isolated  from  the  central block  of the  academy  buildings); to simplify
control over individual  students; and  finally, since the academy is  after
all designated as a military-diplomatic academy, it seems wise that not  all
its faculties should bear names connected with espionage.
     The  third  faculty  deals  with  operational  agent  intelligence  and
Spetsnaz  intelligence, preparing officers for  intelligence directorates of
military districts. There exists a deep enmity between officers of the first
two faculties  and  officers  of  the  third.  An officer of one  of the two
strategic faculties, however newly  arrived, feels the very deepest contempt
for all those studying in the third faculty. He will be going abroad but the
despised third faculty student will recruit agents  from Soviet or satellite
territory only. But  fate  can be cruel -  and kind. When the worst (usually
the most  arrogant) officers have graduated  from  the strategic  faculties,
they are  sent  to operational  agent intelligence; in their place are taken
the best of the officers graduating from the third faculty.
     The fourth  faculty,  like  the  first,  is not located on the  academy
premises. Moreover,  its individual  courses and groups are separated  among
themselves in conditions of the strictest secrecy. The fourth faculty trains
foreigners  - Poles,  Germans,  Czechs,  Hungarians,  Bulgars,  Mongols  and
Cubans.  Naturally,  not  one  of these has ever  set foot  in  the  academy
buildings and has no idea  where the academy is located; equally  naturally,
the Soviet  trainees in the academy must not have even the slightest contact
with their 'brothers'.
     For  each of  these students in the  Soviet  Army  academy,  a  special
personal cover  story  will have  been worked  out. Frequently, many of them
will study for a year in some normal military academy concerned with tank or
artillery studies, for example, before spending their three to four years on
secret premises.  And these students do not receive diplomas from the Soviet
Army  Academy.  Their  diplomas come from, for  example,  the  Tank  Warfare
Academy. Only a handful of people will know what is hidden under this name.
     The academic courses are something different. These are designed not to
provide a complete training, but only partial one,  and  the period of study
is only one year.  They are  attended principally by  the  most  experienced
officers  and those with the greatest  future prospects, who were chosen for
entry to  strategic faculties of the academy but then transferred by the GRU
into the diplomatic (civil) or overseas trade academy where they completed a
full course  of study.  They  are considered on  a par with the other  civil
students and carry out  their specialised  training in their spare  time and
receive the same diplomas as the graduates of  the two  strategic faculties,
having already received genuine diplomatic diplomas. This is the most secret
part  of  Soviet  intelligence  after  illegals,  for  even genuine  'clean'
diplomats consider them their own kind and do not suspect their intelligence
connections. The  academic  courses  are also  attended  by graduates of the
Military Foreign Languages Institute who have  been  chosen by  the GRU  for
work  abroad.  The GRU uses  them  in  residencies  mainly  for  duties with
technical  and  technical-operational services.  After  a  first  assignment
abroad these  may, provided they have served successfully, enter the academy
in one of the strategic faculties. Lastly, the  academy receives specialists
from  other  fields whom the GRU invites to work in technical services or on
information work.
     There  is  a  post-graduate   school  too,  which  prepares  scientific
personnel for  the  GRU  and also instructors  for  the  academy itself.  An
officer who has  completed  one of  the strategic  faculties,  and  has been
abroad  on  agent  work  and  shown  good   results,  is   accepted  by  the
post-graduate  school for  a  period of instruction of  two to  three  years
during which he  must  prepare  and defend a  scientific  dissertation  on a
subject  chosen by  himself.  The  resulting  qualification is  a scientific
degree, Master of Military Science.
     Who  is  eligible?  This is a  very complex problem. The  candidate who
hopes to please the GRU must fulfil the following conditions:  racial purity
-  there must be  no Jewish blood as far back as the  fourth generation (the
KGB  has no such restriction); ideological stability  and purity; membership
of the communist party; the absence of  any contact with overseas, excepting
the 'liberation' of Hungary and Czechoslovakia and the 'defence of socialism
in eastern Europe'. He must have a wife and children of complete ideological
and racial purity. He must have strong  and reliable family  connections, on
his own side and his wife's.  There must be  no compromising material on the
files of  any of their relatives. None of his relatives may have been either
prisoners  of war in Germany,  nor on Soviet  territory  under the temporary
occupation of  German  forces.  And there  must be  no  signs  whatsoever of
alcoholism,  sexual promiscuity, family  problems, corruption and so on, nor
must  the  officer  have  any  prominent  distinguishing features or  speech
defects.
     One  of the most difficult things  in selecting candidates  is to  find
people  who  understand the political situation in the world and can clearly
see  possible  future  developments  without  being  secret   free-thinkers.
Obviously  anyone who is politically inept is not acceptable to the GRU, but
if a man is moderately  intelligent, there is always the danger  that secret
doubts will begin to  penetrate his head. Naturally, when this rare creature
is found he is  instantly made to sit meaningless examinations and, from the
very first day, accorded appropriate honours.
     In a classless society, everybody is  equal and life is therefore happy
and free. All people are friends and brothers and nobody  will try to do his
neighbour down. People may pursue  their ambitions without let or hindrance.
Of  course, if  you live in the  country, you cannot move to the city, still
less the capital Moscow,  without the permission of  the Central  Committee.
Society  may be classless, all right, but it is divided, for the good of the
people, into parts - you have the right to live in the city or you have not.
You  may rightly say  that you would prefer to live in the city, but you are
branded from  birth -  if you were born in the country,  you must stay there
and so must your children and grandchildren  -  for their own good. Unless -
unless you do  something like become a GRU  officer.  Immediately,  you will
find  yourself in Moscow, with  a permanent  residence permit. This  is good
news  for   not   only   you,  but  your  children   and  grandchildren  and
great-grandchildren  and  great-great-grandchildren  down  to  the  fortieth
generation, who  will all have  Moscow  residence  permits and will  legally
reside in Moscow.
     It  is as if you had moved onto  a higher sphere, as  if  you and  your
relations had suddenly been ennobled.  You should draw your  family  tree on
the wall of your  apartment so  that future generations of  your family will
know who it was who lifted them up to the heights.
     In  capitalist  societies,  where everybody is  naturally  out for each
other's  blood,  people  move  around  chaotically,  causing  untold  social
problems.  These could all be eradicated with the introduction of  residence
permits  on the Soviet model. The Moscow residence permit, logically, is the
first privilege of  a GRU officer. There are others, of course. For example,
an ordinary general staff officer is unable to buy a car during the whole of
his life unless of  course he steals or is sent abroad. A GRU officer may in
three years  buy  not  only a car, but  also  an apartment. Drawing  another
distinction, it is often asked  how much more a GRU officer  abroad earns in
comparison with the same officer in  Moscow. It is impossible to answer this
question  sensibly, because in  Moscow the  officer spends money which is to
all practical  purposes incapable  of buying anything except  food of rather
inferior  quality  and  equally  inferior  clothes.  He  who is sent abroad,
however, receives foreign currency  and can buy  everything  he  needs  both
while he is  abroad  and at home in the Soviet Union  in the special foreign
currency shops. In possessing  foreign currency  a GRU officer becomes a man
of completely different class, very sharply distinguished from all those who
do not have it. Special shops and restaurants are open to him, where he  can
buy  anything  he  wants, without  queueing.  The ordinary  Soviet  citizen,
including the general staff officer or even the  GRU  officer who  does  not
serve abroad, may not even enter these shops.
     So Soviet society is as racial  as it can possibly be, only race is not
determined by the colour of your skin but  by  whether you have the right to
travel  abroad or  not. Imagine  any  country,  France perhaps,  putting  up
outside  shops  the  announcement  that:  'Nobody  of  French nationality is
allowed to enter this  shop. Only those on the list of the Central Committee
of  the Communist Party  are admitted.'  But in the Soviet  Union there  are
everywhere shops,  hotels, restaurants which Russians may not enter, because
they are Russian. Life for a GRU officer possessing  foreign  currency is on
an infinitely wider scale than for the 270 million  who are  deprived of the
right to hold foreign  currency. And once he has become  a representative of
the upper class, he becomes inordinately jealous of his right, fearing above
anything  the loss of the privilege which allows him to  travel abroad. This
is  why he defends  himself against any  revelation about  his  own  person,
against any, even the most insignificant, contacts with the police.  This is
why he tries to hide from his superiors even the smallest shortcomings. This
is why  he is  capable of any  dirty  trick  upon anybody, including his own
comrades, when what is at stake is whether  he should remain another year in
a hot, humid, subtropical posting - or return early to Moscow.

     Conclusion
     For a GRU  officer, there are  countries in which he dreams of working.
There are also countries in which he would rather not work. There are cities
he dreams of, and cities he sees in nightmares.
     The dream city for a GRU officer is  Peking. Its  infernal counterpart—
Tokyo. This might appear strange, because for the top brass of the GRU quite
the reverse is true: Tokyo  is heaven, Peking hell. But the  interests of  a
GRU officer are directly opposed to the interests of the top brass. The  top
brass desire  high productivity,  while the work force has  rather different
aims.
     Imagine that you are lucky and are posted to  China. What awaits you? A
vast,  splendid  embassy  behind high walls.  Chit-chat with colleagues from
other embassies, gossip about the state of health of the Chinese leaders and
the Ambassador's wife. After five years your  return home, obviously without
having recruited any  agents. But nobody will bawl you  out for it, you will
not have  your  epaulettes  torn off, no one will call you lazy or a coward.
Everyone understands  that you  have been  in hell,  where  serious work  is
impossible....
     And now imagine that you are an unlucky spy and  the  GRU  post  you to
Tokyo. Both you and  the  GRU  top brass know that there are no laws against
spying there,  that  conditions for spying  are  ideal. So what awaits  you?
Exhausting  stressful  work, fifteen  to seventeen hours a day, with no rest
days and no  feast days. No matter how many secrets you manage to acquire it
will never be enough. No matter how many agents you recruit it will never be
enough. Your paradise will be  snowed under  with cipher cables  from Moscow
addressed to the resident saying:  'You have  seventy operational  officers!
Where's your productivity? What you managed to get yesterday we have already
received  from  Hong  Kong!  From  Berlin!  From  illegals!  Where  are  the
secrets!!!???' You  may rest assured that this  question  is  put by the GRU
daily  to  the resident—who will in turn ask you the same question, pounding
the table with his enormous fist. He will fight for the kind of productivity
that can only be achieved through merciless competition. If your  output  is
not up to scratch you will simply be sent home and your career broken.
     Personally  I have  never been to Tokyo, but I have  had to  work in  a
country   which   was   considered   'paradise'  by  the   GRU   top  brass.
Understandably, for us it was 'hell'. A weak police system  in that  country
meant  that the other  residents continually used it as an intermediate base
for  their operations,  and it  was a  busy crossing point for GRU illegals,
too. All of them had to be taken care of and helped. Acting as a supply base
for agent network operations is rather like serving in a signals unit during
a war: as  long as communication lines are maintained nobody remembers  you,
but should communications be interrupted the signaller  is sent  to a  penal
battalion forthwith,  charged with the failure  of the entire operation. The
difference between  us  and the signals boys lay in the fact that  no matter
how well  we maintained supplies,  how successful our own work was, we  also
had to recruit  agents. After all, we were living  in 'paradise',  where the
police was weak and Soviet diplomats were never expelled.
     I'd like to beg all who are responsible for  the  security of the West:
be human.  Do expel Soviet spies occasionally.  By  expelling one you enable
others to reduce their frantic activity. A spy is a human being. He bears on
his shoulders the immense pressure of the gigantic GRU establishment, and he
has no excuse for any lapses. He needs one, so be human.
     Who should be expelled first? The answer is obvious:  the resident. The
expulsion of the  resident is equivalent to clearing the King off the chess-
board:  it spells checkmate to  the 'residentura', no  matter how aggressive
and successful it is. Usually the local police know who he is. He is easy to
identify. He has already served abroad for twelve  to fifteen  years, he has
been  very  active  and, judging by  the signs, successful. Now  here  he is
serving abroad  again, in a  senior diplomatic post, and hardly ever leaving
the  embassy, but  sitting there  motionless, like a spider. Clearly  it  is
against him that  all forces  must be mobilised. This is not easy. He breaks
no laws, does not speed up and down the motorways day and night,  carries no
stolen secrets  in his car. But he is  more  dangerous than all his officers
put together.
     There is a deep-seated and erroneous belief that known residents should
not be allowed into the country. Sometimes they  aren't, sometimes they  are
simply not  granted entry visas. This is  a mistake.  I will try to explain,
using my own resident as  an example. He was a man of  unflinching will  and
powerful  intellect,  a true ace of spies:  careful, perfidious, calculating
and fearless. He was promoted to major-general at the age of thirty-six, and
he had a brilliant career in front of him in the upper echelons of the  GRU.
But  all  he  wanted was to  be  a resident, and  as a  result he remained a
major-general. Without any doubt the  Security Services in the West knew him
well. Prior  to one of his postings abroad  the Soviet  Ministry of  Foreign
Affairs asked for  a Belgian visa  for him. It was refused. They asked for a
French one - again refused. Then a  West German one - refused again. Finally
a small country with a soft, friendly government agreed to grant him  entry.
The  GRU gave the  resident his final briefing, which of course included the
names and addresses of the members of  the network run by the 'residentura'.
As  soon  as he arrived in  the  country he started  extending  the  network
speedily and vigorously, until it was working successfully against the  USA,
against Belgium, against France, against all the countries which had refused
him entry. In other words, barring a resident from  a  country does not mean
rendering his network ineffective (see Appendix C).
     Now imagine another set  of circumstances.  Supposing the first country
approached, in this case Belgium, had issued the visa. The resident would be
briefed, let  into all the  'residentura' secrets,  and would arrive  in the
country. However if,  three to  four months later, Belgium found some reason
or other to expel him, the results of this would be threefold:
     1.  The resident will have  had  time to disrupt the existing system of
work in the residency but not to build up a new system.
     2. Having to  leave the country suddenly, the resident will  leave  his
army without a commanding officer. Time  will be needed for the  successor's
visa application and more time to brief the new resident. In the interim the
residency will remain inactive.
     3. The experienced resident, on returning to Moscow, will be completely
neutralised. For the following three to four years, visa applications cannot
be sent  for him either to France  or West Germany or any other country that
Belgium will have notified as an ally.
     One   experienced,  authoritative,  demanding  and  merciless  resident
serving in a  neutral  country  with  ten  officers  under his  command  can
sometimes harm  the West more  than two  hundred  very  active GRU  officers
working in the USA, Great Britain, West Germany or France. This  is not only
a matter of my opinion, it is also the opinion held by Moscow Centre, and it
was  the opinion  held by  my  first resident, who  taught  me unforgettable
lessons in concentration on target, persistence and mad risk. I am sincerely
sorry that he has stayed the other side of the barricade....
     How should one go about the business of expulsion? The short answer is:
as noisily as possible. To expel a Soviet spy is of course a victory. But to
expel him noisily means that  you are  making  as  much capital out  of  the
victory  as you  can.  The  silent expulsion of  a  Soviet spy  is an action
directed against one man. The noisy expulsion  is a slap in the face for the
GRU, for the KGB; it is an action directed against all their spies,  against
thousands  of  unstable  people prepared to listen  to  the proposals of the
Soviet intelligence service. Here is another example encountered  during  my
work.
     I had  a reasonably  good relationship with a young man who  agreed  to
'lose' his passport. In return he agreed to 'find' some money. This  was the
first step towards  the  morass. Further well-tried steps were planned which
would have pushed him deeper in each time; once in, he would never have been
able  to  get  out.  However,  on  the  day  scheduled  for  a  meeting,  an
insignificant local paper published an item stating  that fifty per  cent of
the Soviet  Embassy  staff were spies. So at our meeting, instead of  losing
the money I had with me and  finding his  passport, I  had to spend the time
proving to him that the news item was a  lie.  And it really was a barefaced
lie, as at that time not fifty but eighty per cent of the Embassy staff were
spies. I managed to convince the young man. We remained good friends ... but
nothing more. He did  not  take the crucial step. Should you, young  man, be
reading  my book,  my greetings to you. I am glad for your sake, in spite of
the fact that  at the time I felt my failure deeply. But what can a poor GRU
spy do in a situation when  the powerful free Western  press  publishes such
items at the least suitable moment?
     Finally the  question  arises  as to how  many  Soviet  spies should be
expelled. The only answer is: all. What do you need them  for? Why keep them
in your country? They  are professionals  specially  selected and trained to
destroy your country. If you  have the evidence to prove that they are spies
-  expel  them.  Sometimes  the theory is  put forward  that it is better to
unearth a spy and keep him  under surveillance than to expel him, as  then a
new  one  will  be  sent  in  and  we  will  not  know whom  to  keep  under
surveillance. That is correct. But every expelled spy represents a nightmare
to the new ones, who fear deeply being appointed as  replacements. Secondly,
intelligence experience is much more valuable than any amount of  education,
and  one  experienced spy is a hundred times  more dangerous  than a  young,
green one.  The more inexperienced  spies you have  in your country the more
mistakes will be made, the easier it will be to watch them.
     But  if we  expel  people,  runs  the argument, the  Soviet  Union will
retaliate  and expel our innocent diplomats from  Moscow. That is so. But to
that  there  is an  antidote  -  you must expel  large  groups  of diplomats
simultaneously.  Look at these statistics: Holland expelled one - the Soviet
Union's reply :  two. Turkey  expelled one  - the  reply : two.  But  if you
increase the number to five the Soviet reply will be  five or  fewer. Canada
expelled thirteen  -  the  reply  : two. France expelled  forty-seven  - the
reply: nil.
     Great Britain simultaneously expelled 105 (the entire  staff of the GRU
and KGB residencies). There  was no  comeback. If you  take  similar  action
against Soviet spies I guarantee that your diplomats in Moscow will be safe.
I  guarantee  that your diplomats will  be  greatly respected, and that  the
Soviet leadership will look  for opportunities to improve its relations with
you. The Soviet leadership  understands and acknowledges strength.  But only
strength and  nothing  else. The Soviet Union can respect the sovereignty of
any country, no matter how small  it looks  on the map. But the Soviet Union
respects  the  sovereignty  only  of those  nations  who  respect  their own
sovereignty and defend it.

     For GRU Officers Only
     I  was condemned to death by the Military College of the  Supreme Court
according to article 64a. My crime - betrayal of the homeland. I still plead
not guilty as  charged. The betrayers of the homeland  are those who are now
in the Kremlin. The betrayers of the homeland are those who shot millions of
the best  Russian farmers. Russia has always grown wheat. Grain was its most
important  export. Those who have made of Russia an importer  of grain -they
are the  betrayers  who should be sentenced under article 64. On  the eve of
war the communist leaders  shot  the  best marshals and  generals. They were
motivated not by the interests of the homeland, but by the desire to hold on
to their power. They should  be tried in a court of law. For the  deaths  of
the  marshals  and generals, my people paid the price of tens of millions of
lives. Those  who are guilty of that  should be tried. Those in  the Kremlin
who have brought my people to complete moral and physical degradation - they
are  the traitors.  These people are driving my  comrades to their deaths in
Afghanistan,  demanding  the  deaths of  innocent  people  -  they  are  the
criminals.
     If  they at  some  future  time should be  judged and given  their just
deserts,  and if, then, my  country then considered me to be a traitor  also
for deserting it, then I am ready to take my punishment, but only after they
have taken theirs.
     When I was in the GRU I could see  two ways to protest:  either I could
commit suicide; or  I could escape to the West, explain my disagreement with
the communists and then commit suicide. I chose the second way, which is not
a  whit easier than than  the  first.  It is an  agonising  way.  If any GRU
officer now finds himself in the same dilemma — to go or to stay —  I advise
him  to think  over  his decision a hundred times, and then  again. If he is
thinking  of  fleeing to the West, then  my advice to him is  - don't do it.
Article 64 will be waiting for  him, as will the shameful epithet 'traitor',
and an agonising death, maybe even on  the  frontier itself. My advice would
always be  - don't go.  He shouldn't go until such time as he is certain why
he is going. If you want an easy life -don't go. If you like long, luxurious
motorcars - don't go, it is not worth  it for the sake of a car. If  you are
attracted to Western women  - don't  go,  theirs are  really no  better than
ours. If you think that in the West  it is good, and at home  in Russia bad,
then  you are mistaken -  ours is a beautiful country. Don't go for the sake
of foreign beauties and wonders.
     Only  if you know  there is no other  way for you, if you consider your
leaders as criminals, if you yourself do  not  wish to be  a criminal - then
you should go.  If  you are prepared to  risk your life  for  one  minute of
freedom - then  go. If you  don't feel yourself a traitor by going - go. If,
by going,  you can bring nearer the moment when the communists are judged by
the  people of our  country, if  you  can help  your people, if you are then
ready  to stand before the people and await  their decision on  your  fate -
then you  must go. You will dream of Mother  Russia every night,  but go for
the sake of her future and I promise you that you will be happy.

     Appendix A
     Leaders of Soviet Military Intelligence
     I soon  realised  that  a history of the GRU would  be  a very  fraught
undertaking.  It is clear that the very shortest  history of  the  GRU would
fill several  massive tomes  and could  only be  written after  the  fall of
communist power. The history written  in this book consists only of isolated
details, only  vague outlines  of  a  continent shrouded in the  mists.  The
picture may be made clearer by studying the destiny of those individuals who
have held  the highest  power  in  Soviet  military  intelligence. In  their
destinies the whole history of the organisation is reflected.
     ARALOV, Simon Ivanovich: 18.12.1880 - 22.5.1969.
     He was  born in  Moscow to rich merchant parents and educated to follow
his father's profession. In 1905 he joined the Tsar's army and served in WWI
as a major in military intelligence. A participant in the October Revolution
he was one of the creators of the Tcheka. In January 1918 he became chief of
the   Operational  Department  of  the  Moscow  military  district.  Rapidly
promoted, in October 1918 he became the first chief of military intelligence
until July  1920. In 1920 he moved down to chief of intelligence, 12th Army,
and then regained ground commanding intelligence  of the  S.W. front.  After
1921  he  was a  deputy  of the chief  of military intelligence,  working in
Turkey,  Latvia  and  Lithuania  as  undercover  ambassador  and  later  was
responsible for setting up  residencies in  the  United  States, Germany and
Japan.  In  1937,  dismissed  from all posts, he  was  employed as a  deputy
director of the  Literature  Museum. Arrested in 1938, he  spent three years
under  interrogation.  In  1941  he  was serving  as  a private in  a  penal
battalion. Four years later, he was a colonel,  and when the war was over he
was taken back into the GRU. Then, arrested in 1946, he spent ten years in a
concentration camp. On his liberation he was immediately appointed deputy to
the  chief of  the GRU.  In  1957 he  was  again  dismissed  in the  Zhukov/
Shtemyenko purge, but lived quietly until his death.
     STIGGA, Oskar Ansovich: 1894 - 29.7.38.
     Born  in Latvia,  he  served in WWI and became  a  communist  after the
Revolution, and  a  leader  of  the Red  Latvian  Riflemen.  He  engaged  in
suppressing counterrevolutionaries in Moscow and became  a private bodyguard
of  Lenin.  In October  1918  he  was  a  deputy of  the chief  of  military
intelligence and immediately moved as  an illegal into Poland, Lithuania and
Latvia. In 1919 he became chief of intelligence of the Western front, and in
August 1920 became chief of military intelligence.  Reduced to deputy status
after  1922,  he travelled extensively  as an illegal to create new networks
until his recall to Moscow in 1938, when he was shot.
     NIKONOV, A.M. (Nikonson): ? - 29.7.38.
     It remains uncertain whether this was his real name  or simply  a party
pseudonym like Lenin,  Stalin,  Trotski, Zinoviev and  others.  His date  of
birth is unknown. He was chief of military intelligence after Stigga, but it
is  not known  whether  Berzin took over from him  or  from  another, so far
unidentified,  chief of military  intelligence. He too was executed  in  the
great terror of 1938.
     2nd  Grade  Army Commissar  BERZIN, Yan  Karlovich  (real  name  Kyuzis
Peteris): 13.11.1889 - 29.7.38.
     Born in Latvia, Berzin  joined the Social-Democratic Party  in 1904. He
was conscripted into the army in the First  World  War but deserted and went
underground. He took part in the October Revolution and afterwards he worked
in the central apparatus of the NKVD and in the NKVD  in Latvia.  One of the
main organisers of  the 'Red Terror', he  initiated the hostages system.  He
was  also  a  fervent  supporter  of   the  establishment   of  a  communist
dictatorship in Latvia and one  of the organisers and leaders of the Latvian
Red Army (subsequently  the  15th Army). He was head of a special department
of this army  and played a  part in  the suppression of the Russian sailors'
mutiny at Kronstadt. He particularly  distinguished himself in the course of
the  pursuit  and liquidation of captured sailors.  >From April 1921  he was
Deputy  Head of  Intelligence Directorate (GRU) but,  from his first days in
military intelligence,  he was, de facto, its  head. With effect  from March
1924 he became its head  legally as well. He was one of  the  most talented,
industrious and successful heads  of intelligence,  the creator of  the most
powerful and successful intelligence organisations in existence anywhere. He
personally recruited and ran  the most outstanding  intelligence  officers -
Yakov Mrachkovski (Gorev), Moshe Milstein (Mikhail M), Ruth and Rolf Werner,
Richard Sorge,  Lev Manevich, Sandor Rado, Karl Ramm, Aino Kuusinen,  Ignati
Reis  and  the  most  eminent intelligence  officer  of  the  20th  century,
Konstantin  Efremov.   In   1936  Berzin  transferred  the  Soviet  military
intelligence  command post from Moscow to  Madrid, where he carried out  his
most  notable  recruitments  while  he was working under  cover,  officially
designated as chief military adviser to the Republican  Government. In order
to sustain this cover story his deputies  Uritski and Unshlikht  carried out
his duties in Moscow.  On returning from Spain he continued to lead military
intelligence. On 13 May 1938 he was arrested and on 29 July he was shot.
     UNSHLIKHT, losif Stanislavovich:  19.12.1879 - 29.7.1938. An hereditary
Polish  nobleman and  an  active member  of the  Polish (left-wing)  Social-
Democratic  Party,  he  was one of the  leaders of the  October  Revolution.
Immediately after the revolution  he became a member of the NKVD college. He
began the policy of state terror before Dzerzhinsky, and at  one time he was
considered by Soviet historians as the  'first founder of the Tcheka' at the
same time as Dzerzhinsky was considered the 'chief founder of the Tcheka'. A
fervent supporter of  the establishment  of communism in Poland,  in 1920 he
was a member of the 'Polish Revolutionary Government'.  From 1921-23 he  was
deputy chairman of the All-Russian Tcheka and one of the fathers of the 'Red
Terror". From 1923 he was deputy head of the registration directorate (GRU).
In the interests of  cover  he constantly  filled responsible  posts  in the
Soviet Government and the Red  Army. He travelled  abroad several times with
false documents to organise  illegal work in Poland, Lithuania and  Germany.
In 1935-36 during Berzin's absence he carried out the duties of chief of the
GRU although he remained in  fact only deputy to Berzin. He  was  shot  with
Berzin in the cellar of the 'Hotel Metropole' in Moscow.
     Corps Commander URITSKI,  Solomon Petrovich: 1895-1937 was chief of the
GRU during Berzin's absence. He was shot in the first wave of the Terror.
     Commissar-General  of  State Security EZHOV,  Nikolai  Ivanovich: 1895-
1940.  A petty official  who only joined the Bolsheviks when it became clear
that they had won, he occupied  insignificant party posts  in the provinces,
but from 1927 Ezhov was in  Stalin's personal secretariat. In 1930 he was in
charge of  the  Central  Committee Personnel  Department and  in 1935  Party
Secretary, controller of NKVD work. In 1936 he became Peoples' Commissar for
Internal Affairs and Commissar-General for State Security. In  1937-38 there
began under his leadership the 'great purge' which started as a purge of the
NKVD and was then extended to the army, the party and the entire country. On
29 July 1938 there was a repeat purge of  the GRU and, having liquidated the
whole of the leadership and the operational staff, he took over its control,
thus  establishing a monopoly  of  secret activities in the state. From this
moment on it would be impossible for the activites of the GRU and NKVD to be
subject to reciprocal checking. However, the monopoly alarmed Stalin and  29
July saw the beginning of  Ezhov's downfall. In October he was  removed from
his post.  He was arrested  in  January 1939 and liquidated  after atrocious
torture.  According to unconfirmed  data, he  was buried alive  at  the NKVD
sanatorium at Sukhanovo.
     One of the bloodiest  careers in the history of mankind. Ezhov  was the
shortest serving Chief of  the GRU  and suffered the most painful death. The
date of his death has not been established with certainty; there are grounds
for thinking it could have been on 4 June  1940. There are also grounds  for
believing that Ivan Serov, a future chief of the GRU, played a personal part
in Ezhov's death.
     Lieut-General of Aviation PROSKUROV, Ivan losifovich: ? -  5.7.1940. An
outstanding Soviet intelligence officer and  fighter pilot, he combined both
these  professions simultaneously. In 1937-38 he served as a Soviet Military
Adviser  in  Spain. He took  part in air battles and shot down several enemy
aircraft.  At  the  same  time  he  carried  out  a  series  of  first-class
recruitments  amongst  internationalists  of many  countries and  assured  a
regular flow of military and military-technical intelligence.  On his return
from Spain  he became  chief of the GRU, a post he occupied from the end  of
1938 to July 1940. He openly came out against the pact with Hitler. On the 4
July 1940 he was arrested, and the following day shot without trial.
     Marshal of the Soviet  Union  GOLIKDV,  Filipp  Ivanovich:  16.7.1900 -
29.6.1980. He entered the Red Army as a volunteer in 1918 and took an active
part in the  suppression of anti-communist peasant riots on the staff of the
3rd  Army  Special Punitive Brigades.  After  the civil war  he commanded  a
regiment, brigade, division and corps. In September 1939 he fought in Poland
as commander of the 6th  Army. In 1940 he became the chief of the GRU. After
Hitler's invasion and  the loss  of contact with  the  most important  agent
network he transferred the GRU command point from Moscow to London under the
guise  of the Soviet military mission. In October 1941  he  returned  to the
USSR. He commanded  an army, then a front. From April  1943 he was deputy to
Stalin for  Red  Army  cadres,  and,  at  the same time,  from 1944 directed
operations  against the  Russian Liberation  Army  and the  search for,  and
liquidation  of,  the  leaders  and  those   taking  part  in  the   Russian
anti-communist  opposition.  Golikov   de   facto   directed  the   forcible
repatriation and destruction of more than a million people who did not  want
to return to the USSR. Golikov directed the post-war purge of the Army. When
it was over he himself was removed from all his posts. He spent two years in
prison, but  by 1950  he was commanding another  army and, from 1956, he was
Academy Chief. >From 1958 he was head of the Chief Political Directorate  of
the Soviet Army  and, simultaneously,  Director of a Party Central Committee
Department. Golikov agreed to  be Army Controller on  the side of the Party.
In 1961 he was made Marshal of the Soviet Union. In May 1962 he  was removed
from office without much rumpus or scandal, however. Golikov may be  said to
have had the most distinguished career in the whole Soviet Army.
     >From July 1941 to  July 1942  Aleksei Pavlovich PANFILOV was Chief  of
the GRU. He was shot in 1942. In 1942-43 the GRU leadership was held by Ivan
Ivanovich ILICHEV. He was also shot.
     Colonel-General  KUZNETSOV,  Fedor Fedotovich:  6.2.1904  -  1979. .  A
country  boy  who  came to  Moscow  and became a factory worker, he  quickly
assessed the situation, joined the Party and embarked on an meteoric career.
By 1937  he was  1st Secretary of the Proletarski district of Moscow, and in
the heat  of the great purge  he showed exceptional  cruelty. In 1938 he was
called  up  into the Army and appointed  deputy  head of the Chief Political
Directorate. He  was an active participant in  the army purge which included
the GRU,  and from  1943 he was chief of the GRU. On his appointment  Stalin
asked him whether he could be as good an intelligence officer as he had been
earlier Party Controller of  the Army. Kuznetsov's reply—'Is there any great
difference?'—has  become  proverbial.  Kuznetsov  at work  demonstrated that
there was no great difference between the  cruel, bloody struggle within the
party and intelligence work. He was one of the cruellest but also one of the
most successful chiefs  of  the  GRU.  In  1943 he  received  the  plans  of
operation 'Citadel'  (the German  attack near  Kursk)  before  General-Field
Marshal E.  von  Manstein,  whose  duty  it was  to  implement those  plans.
Kuznetsov had a special role to play in the organisation and carrying out of
the great powers' conference in Teheran and, as  a reward for his success in
this, received the rank of Colonel-General. In 1945 he played an active part
in the preparations  and implementation of the Yalta and Potsdam conferences
and also personally directed operations to steal American atomic technology.
     In  1948,  at  the  height  of  the  post-war  purges  Stalin appointed
Kuznetsov supreme Party Controller of the Army - Head of the Chief Political
Directorate.  He held  this  post right up to  the time  of  Stalin's death,
mercilessly purging  the  Soviet Army of dissidents. After Stalin's  death a
slow  decline set  in, first to the  post of  Head  of  the Chief  Personnel
Directorate at the Ministry of Defence, then Academy Head and, finally, Head
of the Political Directorate of the Northern Group of Forces. He  retired in
1969.
     General  of   the  Army  SHTEMYENKO,   Sergei  Matveevich:  7.2.1907  -
23.4.1976.  Shtemyenko  joined the Red  Army  as  a volunteer.  He completed
military training and two academy  courses, and from 1940 was on the General
Staff. His rise was swift. In 1943 he was head of the Operations Directorate
of the General Staff and one of  the principal Soviet military  planners and
the  closest to Stalin. He accompanied Stalin  to the Teheran conference. He
became chief of the GRU from  April 1946,  General of the Army and Chief  of
the General  Staff  from  November 1948.  In June  1952, at the time  of the
squabble between  Stalin and the Politburo he came out on  Stalin's side and
was,  by   Politburo   decree,  stripped   of  all  his  posts,  demoted  to
Lieut-General and  despatched to command the Volga military district  staff.
In 1956,  at Marshal  Zhukov's demand, he was returned to Moscow, reinstated
in his rank  of General  of the Army and re- appointed chief  of the GRU. In
October 1957 during the conspiracy against Zhukov, he came  out  on Zhukov's
side.  Once again he  was stripped of his offices,  demoted to Lieut-General
and sent off to command a military district staff. In June 1962 he was Chief
of  Staff for Land Forces.  In 1968 his  rank  of  General of  the  Army was
restored  and  he was  appointed First Deputy Chief  of  the General Staff -
Chief of Staff of the Warsaw Pact. He was still in favour when he died.
     Shtemyenko's  career was  feverish  as  well as resilient.  He  was pat
forward three times for the rank of Marshal of  the Soviet Union,  the first
time  at  the  age of forty-one, but he never  received  the honour.  He  is
considered to have been the most energetic, erudite and merciless of all GRU
chiefs.
     General of the Army KURASOV, Vladimir Vasilievich: 7.7.1897 - 29.11.73.
A Russian Army officer who went over to the side of the communists after the
revolution. He served on various  staffs, and  from 1940  was deputy head of
the General  Staff  Operations Directorate.  During the war he was  Chief of
Staff  of  the 4th Shock  Army,  and  later a front. After  the war  he  was
Commander-in-Chief  of the  Central  group of  forces  in  Austria. Promoted
General of the Army, he was  made chief of the GRU in  February 1949. In the
same year he was removed from this office and appointed Chief of the General
Staff Academy.  From 1956-61 he was  Deputy Chief of the General Staff.  His
career ran smoothly. It has been said that, having accepted the GRU post and
learning of the fate of all his predecessors Kurasov, on a specious pretext,
declined the office and  transferred to a less hazardous post. This story is
corroborated by several independent sources
     Marshal of  the Soviet  Union ZAKHAROV,  Matvei Vasilievich: 5.8.1898 -
31.1.1972.
     Zakharov  was in Petrograd  in  the  First World War  and avoided being
conscripted into the Army. He came out actively against the war,  joined the
Red Guard  in April 1917 and stormed the Winter Palace. He then took part in
the suppression of anti-communist manifestations and  held unimportant posts
in the Red Army.  By 1936  he had  worked  himself  up  to the command of  a
regiment. The  great  purge  opened  up  many  vacancies,  and in July  1937
Zakharov was Chief of  Staff of the  Leningrad Military District,  and, from
May 1938, Deputy Chief of the General Staff.  During the war he was Chief of
Staff of the 9th  Army  and later front,  and, after the war,  Head  of  the
General Staff Academy. He became  chief of the GRU in  January 1949. In June
1952 a fierce  struggle broke  out about convening  the 19th Party Congress.
The  Politburo  insisted,  Stalin objected. The  Chief of the General  Staff
Shtemyenko, and  the  Chief  of the GRU Zakharov, supported Stalin  and were
dismissed from  their posts. After Stalin's death Zakharov's fall continued,
but in  May  1953  he  was appointed  Commander  of  the Leningrad  Military
District and was able to hold on to  this  post. In  October 1957 a struggle
broke  out between the Politburo  and Marshal Zhukov. Zakharov was fully  on
the  side  of  the Politburo  and  for  this  he was  immediately  appointed
Commander-in-Chief of the  Group of Soviet Forces in Germany. In 1959 he was
made Marshal of the Soviet Union, and Chief of the General Staff in 1960. In
1963  he  was  dismissed. He took an active part in  the conspiracy  against
Khruschev  and,  after the successful coup d'etat was  re-appointed Chief of
the General Staff where he served up to September 1971—practically up to the
time of his death.
     Colonel-General SHALIN,  Mikhail Alekseevich was chief  of the GRU from
1951-56 and from November 1957 to December 1958.
     General of the Army SEROV, Ivan Alekseevich.
     An officer  of military intelligence, at  the time of the purges of the
GRU he managed not only to survive but also to transfer to work in the NKVD.
On  12  June  1937  he appeared  in  the  capacity of executioner of Marshal
Tukhachevski  and  other  leading  figures of the Red Army. Amongst  all the
protagonists  of  the terror  he distinguished himself  as  the most fervent
exponent of  'scenes  on a massive scale'. He took  part in the  pursuit and
liquidation of the inhabitants of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania  in 1940 and
in 1944-47. Data exists as to his personal  involvement in the murder of the
Polish officers  in Katyn. During the war  Serov was one  of the leaders  of
Smersh, and in August 1946 he personally took  part  in the execution of the
command  of   the  Russian  Liberation  Army  under  Lieut-General   Vlasov.
Subsequently  he betrayed his leaders in Smersh and the NKGB,  going over in
time to the camp of the victorious groups.  He deserted Abakumov's group for
that of Beria and betrayed  him (as did  General Ivashutin - the present GRU
leader). In 1953 he  was deputy chief of the GRU and one of the conspirators
against Beria. After the fall of Beria,  Serov became  Chairman of  the KGB.
Together  with Ambassador Andropov he  seized  the leaders of  the Hungarian
revolution by  deceit  and took  part  in  their torture and  execution.  In
December 1958 Serov became chief of the GRU. As an ex-KGB and Smersh officer
he had many enemies in the GRU. Under Serov's leadership, corruption in  GRU
attained  unbelievable  proportions. In 1962 he  was dismissed  and  quietly
liquidated.
     Serov's was the dirtiest career in the history of the GRU. He displayed
a high degree of personal sadism. The years when Serov was chief  of the GRU
were also the most unproductive in its history. It  was the only period when
GRU  officers voluntarily  made contact  with Western services and gave them
much more valuable information than they took from them.
     General of the Army IVASHUTIN, Peter Ivanovitch: 5.9.1909 –
     A  volunteer in the punitive formations  of the Special Purpose  Units,
Ivashutin came into  Army counter-intelligence from 1931. During  the war he
held leading  posts in  Smersh.  Even at this time  Ivashutin  had  powerful
enemies in the NKGB. In 1944-45 he was chief of Smersh on the 3rd  Ukrainian
Front and in that  capacity waged a ferocious struggle against the Ukrainian
insurgent army and played an  active  role in the establishment of communist
order in Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and Hungary. It was at this time that he first
met Brezhnev, and in all subsequent activities the two  men always supported
each other. At  the end  of  the  war  Ivashutin took  part in the  forcible
repatriation of Soviet  citizens who did not want to  return  to  the Soviet
Union.  He  also played  a special part  in the liquidation  of soldiers and
officers of the  Russian Liberation Army. After the disbandment of Smersh he
managed  to  outlive its  other leaders  by  a timely  transfer out  of  the
Abakumov faction into that of Beria. At Beria's downfall he went over to the
Serov faction and was appointed head of  the KGB  3rd Chief  Directorate. He
then  took  part  in the arrest  and  liquidation of  Serov.  On  Brezhnev's
recommendation in 1963, Ivashutin  was  appointed chief of the GRU. In  this
position he  had a number of very  serious  confrontations with the  KGB and
personally with Andropov. However, Ivashutin defended  the interests of  the
Army with more vigour than any of his predecessors and, therefore,  in spite
of  his  past ties with the KGB,  enjoyed unlimited  support  from the first
deputy chairman  of the  Council of Ministers, the chairman  of the Military
Industrial  Complex Smirnov  as  well as Marshals Ustinov and Ogarkov. After
Andropov's coming to power Ivashutin held on to his post in view of powerful
support within the Army.

     Appendix B
     The GRU High Command and Leading GRU Officers
     The  following  list gives  names  of the  most  prominent  senior  GRU
officers with their official titles  where possible. This  is followed by an
alphabetical list of some of the known  operational  officers working  under
cover around the world.
     Army  General  IVASHUTIN, Petr Ivanovich: deputy  chief  of the General
Staff  of  the  Soviet  Armed  Forces.  Head  of  GRU.  Official  pseudonyms
'Tovarishch Mikhailov', 'Dyadya Petya'. The first pseudonym  is also used in
connection with all military intelligence.
     Col-General LEMZENKO,  Kir Gavirlovich: GRU representative in the Party
Central Committee; 'Papa Rimski'.
     Col-General PAVLOV, Aleksandr Grigorevich: first deputy chief of GRU.
     Admiral BEKRENEV: deputy chief of GRU.
     Col-General ZOTOV, Arkady  Vasilievich: deputy chief  of  GRU, head  of
Information.
     Col-General  MESHCHERYAKOV,  V.V.:  deputy chief  of  GRU, head  of the
Military Diplomatic Academy.
     Col-General IZOTOV, S.I.: head of GRU Personnel Directorate.
     Col-General SIDOROV, Y.I.

     Lieutenant-Generals and Vice Admirals (approximately 20)
     Lt-General DOLIN, G.I.: head of GRU Political Department.
     Lt-General  GURENKO,  Vyacheslav  Tikhonovich:  head  of  the  Illegals
Training Centre.
     Lt-General   Aviation    SHATALOV,   Vladimir    Aleksandrovich:    GRU
representative at the Cosmonaut Training Centre.
     Lt-General   KOLODYAZHNY,  Boris  Gavrilovich:  GRU  deputy  chief  for
Internal Security.
     Lt-General  MILSTEIN,  Moshe: GRU  deputy  chief for Disinformation.  A
former illegal and  author of top secret manual Honourable Service. Codename
'Tovarishch M', 'Mikhail M.'.
     Lt-General KOSTIN P.T.: chief of GRU 3rd (?) Directorate.
     Lt-General Engineer PALIY A.: chief of GRU 6th Directorate.
     Lt-General GONTAR: chief of GRU 7th Directorate.
     Lt-General DRACHEV I.M.
     Lt-General KOZLOV M.: Chief of GRU llth (?) Directorate.
     Lt-General BERKUTOV, S.: Information Service.
     Vice Admiral ROZHKO, Gennadi Aleksandrovich.

     Major-Generals and Rear Admirals (approximately 125)
     Maj-General Aviation CHIZHOV, Mikhail Terentyevich.
     Rear Admiral KALININ, Valeri Petrovich.
     Maj-General Aviation KUCHUMOV, Aleksandr Mikhailovich.
     Maj-General SHITOV.
     Rear Admiral KLYUZOV, Serafim Timofeevich.
     Maj-General BARANOV, Aleksandr Vasilievich.
     Maj-General LYALIN, Mikhail Ammosovich.
     Maj-General BEPPAEV S.U.:  Chief of Intelligence of Group Soviet Forces
in Germany.
     Maj-General Artillery LYUBIMOV, Viktor Andreevich.
     Maj-General GONCHAROV, Gennadi Grigorevich.
     Maj-General KHOMYAKOV, Aleksandr Sergeevich.
     Rear Admiral KOZLOV, Andrei Nikolaevich.
     Maj-General MIKHAILOV, Boris Nikolaevich.
     Maj-General ZIMIN, Valentin Yakovlevich.
     Maj-General ANDRYANOV, V.: Spetsnaz.
     Maj-General Aviation MIKRYUKOV, L.
     Maj-General GLAZUNOV, N.
     Rear Admiral SMIRNOV, M.

     Leading GRU Officers
     ABRAMOV, Vladimir Mikhailovich
     BAYLIN, Vladimir Ivanovich
     BELOUSOV, Mikolai Mikhailovich
     BELOUSOV, Konstantin Nikolaevich
     BLINOV, Boris Afanasyevich
<ul><a name=20></a><h2>BARCHUGOV</h2></ul>
     BORISOV, Gennadi Alekseevich
     BORODIN, Viktor Mikhailovich
<ul><a name=21></a><h2>BUDENNY</h2></ul>
     BOROVINSKI, Petr Fedorovich
     BUBNOV, Nikolai Ivanovich
     BUTAKOV, Ilya Petrovich
     DEMIN, Mikhail Alekseevich
<ul><a name=22></a><h2>DENISOV</h2></ul>
     DORONKIN, Kirill Sergeevich
     EGOROV, Anatoli Egorovich
     ERMAKOV, Aleksandr Ivanovich
     ERSHOV, Yuri Alekseevich
     EVDOKIMOV, Sergei Vasilevich
     FEKLENKO, Vladimir Nikolaevich
     FILATOV, Anatoli
     FILIPPOV, Anatoli Vasilevich
     GENERALOV, Vsevolod Nikolaevich
<ul><a name=23></a><h2>GERASIMOV</h2></ul>
     KAPALKIN, Sergei Vasilevich
     KASHEVAROV, Evgeni Mikhailovich
     KOZYPITSKI, Gleb Sergeevich
     LOVCHIKOV, Vasili Dmitrievich
     LAVROV, Valeri Alecseevich
     LEMEKHOV, Dmitri Aleksandrovich
     LOBANOV, Vitali Ilich
     LOGINOV, Igor Konstantinovich
     MOROZOV, Ivan Yakovlevich
     MYAKISHEV, Aleksei Nikolaevich
     NEDOZOROV, Valentin Viktorovich
     NOSKOV, Nikolai Stepanovich
     OSIPOV, Oleg Aleksandrovich
     PAVLENKO, Yuri Kuzmich
     PETROV, Nikolai Kirillovich
     PIVOBAROV, Oleg Ivanovich
     POLYAKOV, Boris Alekseevich
     POPOV, Gennadi Fedorovich
     POTAPENKO, Leonid Terentyevich
     POTSELUEV, Evgeni Aleksandrovich
     PUTILIN, Mikhail Semenovich
     RATNIKOV, Valentin Mikhailovich
     RADIONOV, Aleksandr Sergeevich
     ROMANOV, Anatoli Aleksandrovich
     RUBANOV, Aleksandr Nikolaevich
     SALEKHOV, Yuri Nikolaevich
     SAVIN, Viktor Grigorevich
     SELUNSKI, Valentin Ivanovich
     SEMENOV, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich
     SERGEEV, Yuri Pavlovich
     SHEPELEV, Viktor Petrovich
     SHIPOV, Vladilen Nikolaevich
     SOKOLOV, Viktor Aleksandrovich
     STRELBITSKI, Vladimir Vasilevich
     STUDENIKIN, Ivan Yakovlevich
     SUKHAREV, Georgi Nikolaevich
     SUVOROV, Georgi Borisovich
     UMNOV, Valentin Aleksandrovich
     VETROV, Yuri Pavlovich
     VILKOV, Boris Nikolaevich
     VINOGRADOV, Feliks Vasilevich
     VOLNOV, Vladimir Grigorevich
     VOLOKITIN, Vladimir Ivanovich
     VOTRIN, Sergei Ivanovich
     VYBORNOV, Ivan Yakovlevich
     YAKUSHEV, Ivan Ivanovich
     YURASOV, Viktor Vladimirovich
     ZHELANNOV, Vladimir Mikhailovich
     ZHEREBTSON, Aleksandr Vasilevich
     ZHERNOV, Leonid Andreevich
     ZHURAVLEV, Ivan Mikhailovich
     ZOTOV, Viktor Nikolaevich

     Appendix C
     Some Case Histories of GRU Activities
     Rather  than sprinkling  the text with examples I  have put together  a
representative sample of GRU officers uncovered in the course  of operations
abroad,  as reported in  the press.  The number  of GRU officers caught  and
expelled and the nature of their activities is indicative  of the  power and
scale of the GRU.
     Canada and the United States
     In June  1980  the  Canadians announced that  they  had  requested  the
withdrawal  of three  Soviet  officials  from the Embassy, Captain  Igor  A.
Bardeev, Colonel  E.I.  Aleksanjan  and  the  chauffeur  Sokolov.  The  case
involved an  unnamed individual employed in a sensitive position in the USA,
who  had been in contact with the Soviet Embassy and been given the  task of
obtaining  information.  Soviet officials had maintained clandestine contact
with the American citizen over a period of some months.
     France
     In October 1979  the  Naval  and Air Attach6 of the  Soviet Embassy  in
France, Vladimir Kulik, was expelled from the country. He was an officer  of
the GRU working  in French military circles  and  had  been in contact  with
firms specialising in military supplies. In 1979, at  a reception in another
embassy, he had met by  chance  a young Frenchman employed  in the armaments
department  of an  important organisation who  was carrying  out  studies on
behalf of the Ministry of Defence. Kulik sought to maintain contact with the
Frenchman, and in due course offered him a large sum  of money for documents
from his place of work. He also sought to find out details about other staff
at the  organisation where  the Frenchman worked.  Kulik was arrested at the
moment when he was about  to  receive from  the Frenchman a document about a
French weapon.
     In February  1980  the  Soviet  Consul  and  No.  2 in  Marseilles  was
withdrawn. He had been detained by the French authorities between Toulon and
Marseilles with plans  of the Mirage 2000 fighter aircraft in his briefcase.
They had just been handed to him by an agent.
     Travkov had arrived in 1977. The area  of Marseilles and the Bouches du
Rhone contains  many  installations and objects of defence interest. Travkov
was officially  concerned with 'scientific subjects  connected with the port
and airport', and these interests enabled him to meet people involved in the
aeronautical field and to  visit firms and installations.  Travkov  obtained
copies of files  on  staff working on defence contracts and used the details
thus revealed  to build up a network of informers. Four Frenchmen were taken
into  custody  at  the  time  of  Travkov's  arrest. Travkov  had also  been
interested  in the twin-jet Mirage 4000 which used the  same  engine  as the
2000.
     The Soviet Press Attache declared  the  French action a 'provocation by
the police'  but  the documents were, of course,  genuine. A  few days later
Frolov, himself a KGB officer, was required to leave France too. He had been
in Marseilles for two years and had earlier had a posting to Paris. His job,
like Travkov's,  had given him opportunities to meet all sorts of people and
he  had made  the  most  of  it.  Both  Travkov and Frolov  were personable,
charming individuals who made many friends.
     Great Britain
     Anatoliy  Pavlovich Zotov,  the  Soviet  Naval  Attache in  London, was
expelled in  December  1982 after trying to set  up  a  network of agents to
gather information about weapons systems and electronic hardware used by the
Royal Navy during the Falklands campaign. His interests had also extended to
the Royal Navy's nuclear submarines.
     Japan
     A retired  Japanese major-general, Yukihisa  Miyanaga  was  arrested in
Tokyo in January 1980.  He was a GRU agent whose case officer at the time of
his arrest was Colonel  Yuriy N.  Koslov, Military  and Air Attache  at  the
Soviet Embassy. Miyanaga had been  recruited as an agent  in 1974  by one of
Koslov's predecessors. He was equipped with and  instructed in various means
of  clandestine communication,  including  particular ciphers  for use  with
radio. Miyanaga  and two other officers of the Japanese  Ground Self-Defence
Force were subsequently sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for  passing
military secrets to the GRU.
     Norway
     Valeriy  Moiseevich  Mesropov  served in  Norway as an  engineer with a
Russian  firm in Drammen, as a representative of  Stankoimport, from 1968 to
1970. Mesropov, who was not a diplomat, was arrested in 1970 on suspicion of
intelligence activity and finally expelled from Norway for security  reasons
in September 1970.
     Igor Ivanovich Zashchirinsky  served  in  Norway  from  1974 to 1977 as
representative  at the  Soviet  Trade  Delegation  of  a  number  of  Soviet
import/export organisations. He was  engaged  on clandestine  operations  to
obtain information  and products of a scientific/technical nature  including
material classified as Top Secret. He too was declared persona non grata  on
28 January 1977.
     In June 1983  Lt-Colonel  Zagrebnev  was expelled from  Norway. He  was
Military Attache at  the Embassy in Oslo, and had visited a military area in
the north of Norway, where  he had attempted to bribe a Norwegian officer to
hand over secret information.
     Spain
     Oleg Churanov, Director of Aeroflot in Madrid, was arrested in February
1980,  accused  of espionage  for  the Soviet  Union.  His  case was part of
another expulsion of six officials who had already left. It was alleged that
Churanov had  bought  plans  of certain  aviation electronic equipment.  The
'seller'  was  a member of the Spanish Secret Services who purported to be a
member  of a  Spanish firm.  Churanov was an engineer who  had been Aeroflot
representative in Canada before  coming to  Spain. He was very popular  with
staff and  pilots  at  Madrid airport  where he had shown  interest in radio
frequencies and the  security regulations at the airport. He had also tried,
on one occasion,  to get a Spanish pilot to introduce  him into the American
airport  at  Tarrejon. The Spanish  security authorities themselves  claimed
that Churanov was a member of the GRU.
     In  May 1982  the Aeroflot  Director in  Spain was  again  expelled for
spying,  this  time  with  another  official. Vasiliy  Fedorin  and Vladimir
Tertishnikov were accused of trying  to obtain information on  the supply of
US military materials to Spain and on Spanish weapons manufacturers.
     Sweden
     In March 1979  Stig  Bergling, a Swedish  police inspector  and reserve
officer, was arrested in  Israel. He had been an agent of the  GRU for  some
ten years. In  January 1969 he  had begun service with the Police Board, and
from 1971-75 was given leave of absence to serve in the Defence Ministry and
to  do duty with the UN. Bergling had  access to information  about security
police  personnel  and counter-espionage  organisations;  and  about defence
establishments  and  Swedish defence plans.  He was  equipped with  radio to
receive messages from the GRU, and also made use of micro-dots. He  kept  in
touch with his case officers in a  number of countries,  particularly in the
Middle East, having been trained in East Berlin.

<pre><hr noshade><small>Обращений с начала месяца: <b>6</b>, Last-modified: Thu, 12 Sep 2002 13:39:21 GMT
</small><div align=right><form action=mailto:hit@library.niisi.ras.ru method=POST><a href=/HITPARAD/><font color=black>Оцените</font></a> этот текст:<tt><font size=-1><INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=file VALUE=/WSUWOROW/intelligence_engl.txt><SELECT NAME=ocenka><OPTION VALUE=0>Не читал<OPTION VALUE=10>10<OPTION VALUE=9>9<OPTION VALUE=8>8<OPTION VALUE=7>7<OPTION VALUE=6>6<OPTION VALUE=5>5<OPTION VALUE=4>4<OPTION VALUE=3>3<OPTION VALUE=2>2<OPTION VALUE=1>1</SELECT><INPUT TYPE=submit VALUE=Send></font></tt></form></div>

</body></html>
